Protocol

a Matrigel alternative, Cultrex (R&D Systems), in our laboratory rather than the traditional
Matrigel (BD Biosciences). No differences between the two extracellular matrixes are observed
in supporting hPSC expansion. The hPSCs are passaged by using a gentle dissociation method
using Versene solution (or 0.5 mM EDTA solution) to get small clumps for replating. If hPSCs
are thawed for experimental use, it is highly recommended to let them recover for two to three
passages before proceeding for differentiation. We recommend using hPSC lines with no more
than 75 passages.

Differentiation of hPSCs to iNPCs
The induction of NPCs from hPSCs has been optimized on the basis of previous studies7,30.
The modified iNPC differentiation described has been demonstrated to be reproducible in two
human embryonic stem cell (hESC) lines: H1 and H928. Each stage medium is tailored to capture
each developmental stage that sequentially gives rise to iNPCs. The stage I medium initiates
hPSC differentiation to the late primitive streak stage. The stage II medium then specifies the
posterior intermediate mesoderm from the primitive streak. Finally, the stage III medium is to
enrich the NPC populations in the presence of a high concentration of FGF9. On the last day of
the differentiation, the differentiating cells are dissociated to single cells for FACS to purify/
enrich iNPCs. We use a dual reporter of SIX2-GFP;PAX2-mCherry to collect the iNPC population
with high expression of GFP and mCherry, as well as other lines with SIX2-GFP so that sorting can
be done by using the specific marker of SIX2. For hPSC lines that do not have the NPC-specific
reporter system, differentiated cells containing iNPCs can be cultured without FACS in the
hNPSR-v2 medium. Continuous culture in hNPSR-v2 medium will enrich the iNPC population
over two to three passages, reaching ~90% SIX2 positivity by immunostaining. Alternatively, if
there are large populations of off-target cell types after hPSC-iNPC differentiation, FACS can be
used to sort for ITGA8 to further purify.

Expansion of iNPCs with hNPSR-v2 medium and cryopreservation of iNPCs
Once the hPSC-derived iNPCs have been purified via FACS, they are immediately cultured
in hNPSR-v2 medium. Within 2–3 d, these iNPCs form clusters in culture as observed for the
culture of primary human NPCs. Transcriptomes of the iNPCs cultured in hNPSR-v2 medium
are similar to primary NPCs28. hNPSR-v2 medium is refreshed every 1–2 d. Once the iNPCs
reach a confluency of 80–90%, they are dissociated into single cells with Accumax and
passaged at a 1:10 split ratio on Matrigel (Cultrex)-coated plates. Efficient freeze and thaw
can be achieved for cultured iNPCs with commercially available freezing medium Bambanker.
iNPC lines can also be derived without prior FACS purification, which relies on hNPSR-v2
medium to enrich the iNPC population over serial passages. These iNPC lines share similar
properties with the FACS-purified iNPC lines described above and can also be passaged and
cryopreserved.

Generation of nephron organoids from iNPCs
The expandable iNPCs can be used for nephron organoid formation. Once the iNPCs have
reached a confluency of 80–90%, they are dissociated into single cells and reaggregated
at 30,000 cells per aggregate to form iNPC aggregates overnight in 96-well U-bottom lowattachment plates. iNPC aggregates are then gently transferred to a six-well Transwell plate
for air–liquid interface culture. The aggregates are treated with 6 µM CHIR99021 for 1 h
(phase I medium), which mimics the natural epithelization signal in vivo. For the first 5 d,
the aggregates are cultured in phase II medium containing FGF9. Starting from day 5, the
resulting organoids will undergo clear morphological changes that probably reflect the
initial nephrogenesis stages transitioning through renal vesicle (RV), comma-shaped body
and S-shaped body (SSB). On day 5, culture medium is switched to phase III medium, which
supports the maturation of nephron cell types until day 21. At the day of harvest, the organoids
can be prepared for various assays such as whole-mount staining, RNA and protein extraction
for multi-omics analysis and/or assays to determine physiological functions. We usually
use iNPC lines that are cultured for ≤2 months, but iNPC lines cultured for 100 d can still
differentiate into nephron organoids28.
