(A) Dissociation and staining of HFOs in a 96‑well format for subsequent ﬂow cytometry analysis ● Timing 2 h
(i) Set the thermomixer to 37 °C, and ensure that it is prewarmed before you start the dissociation of the HFOs.
(ii) Transfer the HFOs from the 96‑U‑well plate to a V‑shaped 96‑well plate as described in Step 30 (one HFO per well).
(iii) Carefully remove the rest of the culture medium as described in Step 22 (removing the medium from a V‑shaped well requires the same procedure that is used for a U‑shaped well).
(iv) Wash the HFOs with 200 µL of PBS w/o per well (to wash, add PBS w/o and remove it again).
(v) Thaw an aliquot of STEMdiff Cardiomyocyte Dissociation Medium at 37 °C in a water bath. Add 100 µL of the STEMdiff Cardiomyocyte Dissociation Medium per well, and cover the plate with sealing film.
! CAUTION STEMdiff Cardiomyocyte Dissociation Medium is hazardous. Avoid skin contact, ingestion and inhalation.
CRITICAL STEP The incubation time with the STEMdiff Cardiomyocyte Dissociation Medium is critical. Prolonged incubation might be harmful for the cells. Work as fast as possible in steps (v–ix).
(vi) Place the plate on the prewarmed thermomixer, and stick adhesive tape on the four sides of the plate for ﬁxing the plate to the thermomixer. Set the thermomixer to 12 min and 1,000 rpm.
(vii) At 12 min, remove the plate from the thermomixer and ensure homogeneous dissociation by resuspending the cells with a multichannel pipet for a maximum of 1 min.
CRITICAL STEP Depending on the age of the HFOs, the incubation time with the STEMdiff Cardiomyocyte Dissociation Medium may differ. 12–15 min is sufficient for d10–d22 HFOs. If the HFOs are not dissociated after 12 min, place the plate back on the thermomixer for a maximum of 3 more min.
(viii) Add 100 µL ﬂow buffer per well on top, centrifuge the plate at 300 g and 4 °C for 3 min and decant the supernatant.
(ix) Wash the cell pellets with 100 µL of ﬂow buffer per well (wash by adding ﬂow buffer, centrifuging at 300 g and 4 °C for 3 min and decanting the supernatant).
(x) Resuspend the cell pellets in 50 µL of ﬁxation solution, and incubate for 10 min at room temperature.
! CAUTION Fixation medium A from the Fix & Perm kit contains paraformaldehyde, which is considered hazardous. Wear protective equipment and work under the fume hood.
CRITICAL STEP We highly recommend incubating with the ﬁxation solution for precisely 10 min as a prolonged incubation time might be harmful for the cells.
(xi) Centrifuge the plate at 300 g and 4 °C for 3 min, and decant the supernatant.
(xii) Wash the cell pellets with 100 µL of ﬂow buffer per well, and resuspend the cell pellets in 100 µL of ﬂow buffer.
PAUSE POINT The cells can be stored for up to 1 week at 4 °C.
(xiii) Centrifuge the plate at 300 g and 4 °C for 3 min, and decant the supernatant.
(xiv) In the dark, resuspend the cell pellets in 50 µL of permeabilising medium B (from the Fix & Perm kit) containing the directly conjugated antibodies in their respective dilutions. Incubate for 30 min at room temperature in the dark.
(xv) Centrifuge the plate at 300 g and 4 °C for 3 min, and decant the supernatant.
(xvi) Wash the cell pellets twice with 100 µL of ﬂow buffer per well, and resuspend the cell pellets in 100 µL of ﬂow buffer. The cells are now ready for measurement at the ﬂow cytometer.
PAUSE POINT The cells can be stored at 4 °C in the dark for 2 d before measurement.
