d‑2: Matrigel embedding of hPSC aggregates ● Timing 2 h
CRITICAL Two days after seeding (d‑2), the hPSC aggregates are embedded in Matrigel droplets.
14 Before you start, take out the required amount of Matrigel aliquots from the freezer and let them thaw on ice. When the Matrigel is thawed, insert the aliquots into the ice. Take out the sterile scissors (heated to at least 180 °C for at least 3 h), and let them cool down at room temperature.
CRITICAL STEP Ensure the Matrigel is not growth‑factor‑reduced (use cat. no. 354234) and has an appropriate protein concentration; HFO formation has been validated with a Matrigel concentration range of 9.7–10.7 mg/mL. Do not use Geltrex instead of Matrigel since this will result in a failed differentiation based on our experience6.
15 In the meantime, take a look at the 96‑U‑well plate under the microscope to check if the hPSC aggregates have properly formed. Mark the properly formed aggregates (these will be further embedded in Matrigel) and cross out the rest (not round or too small aggregates; see Fig. 4b for examples; these aggregates can be discarded later).
CRITICAL STEP Embedding only properly formed aggregates (round, homogeneous, ~550–650 µm in diameter) is important.
16 Take a 2–20 µL pipet, cut off a piece of the tip holding the scissors at a ~90° angle relative to the tip, and set the pipet to 3 µL (this pipet will be used to pick the aggregates). Take a 10–100 µL pipet (or equivalent) and set it to 20 µL (this pipet will be used for making the Matrigel droplets). The aggregates will be embedded in the Matrigel droplets one by one.
CRITICAL STEP The timing of HFO differentiation (starting time points) on the different days is critical. Begin with Step 16 4–5 h later than the time point at which Step 10 has been started on d‑4. See Table 2 for details.
CRITICAL STEP Form one Matrigel droplet and embed one aggregate at a time to prevent premature solidiﬁcation of the Matrigel.
17 Pipet 20 µL of Matrigel into an empty well of the 96‑U‑well plate.
CRITICAL STEP Depress the plunger of the pipet only until the first stop and discard the residual volume to ensure that no air bubbles will be introduced into the Matrigel droplet. Bubbles within the droplets or the culture medium will cause the Matrigel droplets with the embedded aggregates to ﬂoat during the differentiation process, which will result in a failed differentiation. Make sure the Matrigel is pipetted very slowly.
18 Pick a properly formed aggregate. To do this, use the cut tip (from Step 16), hold the plate almost perpendicularly and aspirate the aggregate. It might be easier to see the aggregates if a background is created, for example by placing a pipet tip box behind the plate.
19 Insert the aggregate into the Matrigel droplet by depressing the plunger of the pipet only until the first stop to prevent the formation of bubbles. Place the lid onto the plate, and check visually if the aggregate is inside the droplet by carefully tilting the plate and looking at the Matrigel droplet from the plate bottom. Steps 16–19 are shown in Supplementary Video 2 and are schematically depicted in Fig. 4c.
CRITICAL STEP It is important not to transfer too much culture medium with the aggregate into the droplet (not more than 6 µL) to prevent dilution of the Matrigel. Thus, if embedding of an aggregate in one speciﬁc Matrigel droplet fails twice, do not continue with this droplet but rather make a new one.
20 Repeat Steps 17–19 until all aggregates are embedded. Use a new tip for every Matrigel droplet. The cut tip does not necessarily have to be changed. Afterward, place the plate into the incubator for 50–60 min to let the Matrigel solidify.
21 Add 100 µL E8 per well. A multichannel pipet can be used in this step. Add the medium slowly and carefully, depressing the plunger of the pipet only until the first stop to prevent damage and ﬂoating of the Matrigel droplets. Place the plate back into the incubator.
