Protocol


predictable organization and reproducible cellular composition, as confirmed by comparisons
of scRNA-seq datasets from several studies43. This mimics the natural development of neural
tissue from the neural tube. Second, in contrast to other protocols, our approach involves
the use of (1) vitamin A-containing B27 supplement, (2) no Wnt inhibitors, (3) prolonged
early treatment with FGF2 and EGF and (4) late, transient exposure to trophic factors (Fig. 1).
Our reasoning for introducing these specific modifications is described in the preceding section.
 Recently, several methods have been developed for more efficient SNR generation from
stem cells (without mechanical dissection from NR clusters)65,69,70. In line with our findings, these
studies reported reproducible cell composition and predictable cell organization in SNRs and
early SNR-derived organoids. In contrast to our study, these studies did not apply FGF2 and EGF
treatment and MG embedding to promote the proliferation of neural progenitors in SNRs and
SNR-derived organoids and obtained relatively small-size organoids (<1.2 mm in diameter by
5 months) with inconsistent organization and impeded functional maturation of neurons and
neural networks65.

Potential applications and adaptations
Our approach for generating organoids can be useful for modeling both normal human
telencephalic development and neurodevelopmental disorders43,71. We demonstrated that the
composition of cells in 1-month-old SNR-derived organoids is highly reproducible, consisting of
telencephalic neural progenitors and both inhibitory and excitatory neurons. This allowed us to
study the specification of different types of neural progenitors and neurons in the developing
telencephalon. Using scRNA-seq-based computational lineage tracing72, we identified signaling
pathways that are associated with the specification of excitatory and inhibitory neural lineages
from a common pool of unspecified neural progenitors. A similar approach can be used to
elucidate the specification of other cell types in the developing human telencephalon under
normal and pathological conditions, including different subtypes of excitatory and inhibitory
neurons and outer radial glia cells that were also detected in 1-month-old SNR-derived
organoids43.
 In addition, we showed that 5-month-old organoids consist of a diversity of neural cells,
including excitatory and inhibitory neural progenitors, deep- and superficial layer cortical
excitatory neurons, LGE-derived inhibitory interneurons, primary striatal inhibitory neurons,
and astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and periendothelial and ependymal cells. Remarkably,
ependymal cells line the lumen in 5-month-old SNR-derived organoids, cortical excitatory
neurons exhibit lamination and primary striatal inhibitory neurons are largely distributed
underneath the cortical layers. These results suggest that 5-month-old SNR-derived organoids
can be used for studying cortical lamination and the specification of glial, periendothelial and
ependymal cells.
 Finally, we found that 5-month-old SNR-derived organoids consist of a relatively large
proportion of functionally mature neurons that generate action potentials, receive both
excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs, and demonstrate functional neural networks,
suggesting that these organoids can be useful for studying the establishment and function of
neural networks in the developing human brain under normal and pathological conditions8.
 We envision that the SNR-based approach can also be used for generating other brain
region-specific organoids, such as striatal, thalamic, cerebellar and midbrain organoids,
with a predictable organization that could further be used for assembling multi-brain regioncontaining organoids, as it has already been done for multi-rosette-containing organoids73–76.
Such organoids will be useful for studying inter-regional brain communication, including
migration and connectivity31,77. In addition, brain organoids with predictable organization and
reproducible cellular composition could be useful for building new biocomputers for artificial
intelligence-related applications78.

Limitations
The limitations of our approach include the use of manual procedures for SNR isolation and
the heterogeneity of isolated SNRs in terms of size, shape and quality, which could contribute
to organoid-to-organoid variability (Figs. 3 and 4). Manual SNR isolation requires time and skill

Nature Protocols | Volume 21 | February 2026 | 718–748 724
