Protocol


Development of the protocol
Rationale for generating organoids from SNRs
During the early stages of human embryonic development (18–19 d post-conception),
gastrulation results in the formation of three germ cell layers: ectoderm, mesoderm and
endoderm47. As development progresses, ectodermal cells undergo extensive proliferation and
form the neural plate (20–21 d post-conception), which is followed by the formation of neural
folds (22–23 d post-conception) and then a singular neural tube (25–26 d post-conception) that
extends throughout the entire embryo. The wall of the neural tube comprises polarized and
pseudostratified neuroepithelial cells that are the earliest neural progenitors in the developing
human embryo. Proper neural tube formation is vital for normal embryonic development,
as neural tube formation abnormalities are known to lead to different birth defects, such
as anencephaly, spina bifida and encephalocele. Remarkably, neural tube-like structures,
termed ‘neural rosettes’, can be spontaneously generated from PS cells in vitro during neural
differentiation44–46. We hypothesized that isolated SNRs could be used as a starting material for
generating predictably organized brain organoids with a singular neural tube-like structure
to mimic the natural development of neural tissue from the singular neural tube. Importantly,
multiple rosette-like structures in neural tissue have been observed in association with brain
tumors48, which may affect neuronal differentiation, migration and maturation49. In the
following sections, we provide the rationale for using specific procedures and reagents during
the generation of SNRs and SNR-derived organoids from human PS cells (Fig. 1).

Neural induction
Efficient neural induction of PS cells in vitro can be achieved through the use of dual-SMAD
inhibition via co-application of a BMP–SMAD1/5/8 inhibitor, such as Noggin, LDN193189 or
dorsomorphin, and an inhibitor of the TGF-β–activin–NODAL–SMAD2/3 signaling pathway,
such as SB-431542 (ref. 18). The dual-SMAD inhibitors induce the neuralization of ectodermal
tissue while destabilizing the pluripotency gene expression networks and suppressing the
induction of mesodermal fates in PS cells. Thus, we use the dual-SMAD inhibitors dorsomorphin
(4 μM) and SB-431542 (10 μM) in neurobasal media with the vitamin A-containing B27
supplement for neural induction (Figs. 1 and 2a–c). Notably, no other organoid generation
protocols use vitamin A-containing B27, as vitamin A is a precursor of retinoic acid, which is
known to induce neural tissue caudalization50. However, we detected no or few cells expressing
caudal markers, such as EN1, FOXA2, GBX2, PAX2, and HOXA2 and HOXA1, in SNR-derived
organoids grown in media with vitamin A-containing B27 (ref. 43), suggesting that a higher
concentration of retinoic acid is probably necessary to induce the caudalization of neural
tissue. Our rationale for using vitamin A-containing B27 was to promote intermediate neural
progenitor specification and corticogenesis51,52.
 Another important distinction of our neural induction protocol is that we use no
Wnt inhibitors. Wnt/β-catenin signaling is essential for supporting neural progenitor
proliferation53,54 and dorsal telencephalic patterning55,56, while Wnt inhibitors are known to
promote the ventralization of telencephalic tissue57,58. We decided to rely on endogenous
morphogens, such as BMP7 and Wnt antagonists SFRP1 and FRZB, which have been detected
in SNR-derived organoids43, to induce the default neurodevelopmental program for the
specification of telencephalic cell fates17,57. Finally, to stimulate the proliferation of newly
differentiated neuroectodermal cells and facilitate their adoption of radial glial identity,
we treat the cultures of neuroepithelial cells with fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2, 10 ng/mL)
and epidermal growth factor (EGF, 10 ng/mL)59,60. In our preliminary experiments, we noticed
that cultures without FGF2 exhibit impaired NR formation, limited organoid growth and
increased cell death. The emergence of neural rosettes is typically observed at 6–8 d post
EGF/FGF2-treatment initiation (Fig. 2d).

NRs
Each NR is a self-organized, three-dimensional, multicellular structure consisting of
neuroepithelial and radial glial cells that are radially distributed around a central lumen
(Fig. 2e). NR cells undergo interkinetic nuclear migration between the basal (outer) and apical

Nature Protocols | Volume 21 | February 2026 | 718–748 720
