38 Fix vascular networks (option A) or grow and ﬁx vascular organoids (option B).
(A) Preparation of vascular networks
CRITICAL Between 40 and 60 vascular networks can be analyzed from one 12-well culture
without any expected loss of material during the preparation procedure.
(i) Carefully aspirate the medium from a well using a P1000 pipette and add 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA) solution in PBS for 20 min at room temperature.
CRITICAL STEP PFA fumes will affect cell viability in neighboring wells. If not all the
wells of the 12-well plate are intended for ﬁxation, use a spatula to carefully lift selected gels
and use a spoon to transfer the matrix to another 12-well plate for ﬁxation.
(ii) Remove the PFA solution and add PBS.
PAUSE POINT Fixed blood vessel networks can be kept in PBS in the refrigerator for up
to 1 month. Seal the plate with Paraﬁlm to avoid liquid evaporation.
(iii) To proceed with staining, cut the gels into smaller pieces (1/4–1/2 of a 12-well gel) under a
stereomicroscope using extra-ﬁne scissors and ﬁne forceps. Avoid cutting through vascular
networks.
(iv) Use forceps to transfer the gel fragments to a fresh 2-mL Eppendorf tube.
(B) Establishment of blood vessel organoids and preparation for staining
(i) For blood vessel organoid cultures, liberate the entire matrix from the well bottom, using
the round end of a sterile spatula. Move the spatula toward the well center along the
bottom of the well until the gel is freely ﬂoating.
(ii) Under sterile conditions, transfer the gel with a sterile lab spoon to the lid of a 10-cm dish
(Fig. 2j). Cover the lid with the 10-cm plate bottom and proceed to a horizontal laminar
ﬂow station equipped with a stereomicroscope.
(iii) Use two sterile 30-gauge needles to cut out single blood vessel networks and try to reduce
the amount of excessive matrix surrounding the organoids (as shown in Supplementary
Video 1). Depending on initial seeding densities, you should expect a full 96-well plate of
organoids from 2 to 3 wells of a 12-well plate.
(iv) Transfer single organoids (using a cut P1000 tip) to a 6-well low-attachment plate and add
5 mL of StemPro-34 SFM complete medium including 15% FBS, 100 ng/mL VEGF-A and
100 ng/mL FGF-2 and incubate the organoids.
(v) One day after separating the blood vessel networks (d11), use a cut P1000 tip to transfer
single organoids to low-attachment round-bottom 96-well ultra-low-attachment plates.
Add fresh StemPro-34 SFM complete medium including 15% FBS, 100 ng/mL VEGF-A
and 100 ng/mL FGF-2. Around 4 d later (d15), blood vessel organoids should show a
round and fully encapsulated morphology (Fig. 2k–m).
