Protocol


for inhibiting BMP signaling. During stage two to generate posterior intermediate mesoderm
from a primitive streak (D4–D7), we noticed dramatic cell death when following the original
protocol, which eventually led to failed differentiation. We found that incorporation of a Rhokinase inhibitor (Y-27632) was able to improve cell survival at this stage, and thus Y-27632 was
added in stage two, in addition to activin A from the original protocol. At the third stage of
differentiation from posterior intermediate mesoderm to NPCs, we used 50 ng ml−1 fibroblast
growth factor 9 (FGF9) instead of the original 10 ng ml−1, because this change significantly
increased SIX2+/PAX2+ iNPC induction efficiency based on dual reporter expression28. By
following this optimized hPSC-to-iNPC differentiation protocol, typically 30–50% of the cells will
be SIX2+ (10–20% will be SIX2+/PAX2+) based on FACS analysis at the end of stage three28.
 FACS-purified SIX2+/PAX2+ iNPCs were then cultured in a chemically defined human nephron
progenitor self-renewal (hNPSR)-v2 medium for expansion28. The hNPSR-v2 medium was
developed from further optimizing our previously described culture medium that can expand
primary mouse NPCs in 3D culture29. The rationale for the development of the NPC culture
condition was to mirror the nephrogenic niche environment that promotes the self-renewal
of the proliferating NPCs in vivo. On the basis of our previously described mNPSR-v1 medium
recipe to culture mouse NPCs as 3D aggregates29,31, which include FGF2, which promotes NPC
survival; BMP7 and mouse leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), which maintain NPC survival and
stemness; CHIR99021, which mirrors the WNT11 signal in vivo that is critical for maintaining
NPC self-renewal; Y-27632 (ROCK inhibitor); heparin (FGF co-factor); A83-01 (transforming
growth factor-β signaling inhibitor); and LDN193189 (BMP signaling inhibitor), we further
screened culture conditions and developed an mNPSR-v2 medium that allows clonal expansion
of mouse NPCs in a regular monolayer culture format instead of 3D aggregate culture28. Key
to the transition from 3D to 2D culture is the use of two additional small molecules, SB202190
(p38 MAPK inhibitor) and DAPT32 (Notch signaling inhibitor). The CHIR99021 concentration
was also adjusted from 1 µM in 3D culture to 1.5 µM in 2D culture. To develop an optimal human
iNPC culture condition, we first replaced mouse LIF in mNPSR-v2 with human LIF to formulate
hNPSR-v1 medium, because mouse LIF does not activate human LIF receptors. However, human
iNPCs cultured in hNPSR-v1 medium were able to maintain their NPC identity for only 2 weeks
before a gradual decline of cell proliferation activity and key NPC marker gene expression
was observed. YAP activity has been reported to have critical roles in NPC self-renewal
in vivo33. Upon observation of decreased YAP activity in the iNPCs cultured with hNPSR-v1,
we supplemented TRULI, a small-molecule YAP agonist34, to hNPSR-v1 medium to formulate
hNPSR-v2 medium. The hNPSR-v2 medium allows long-term expansion of the iNPCs over several
months with retained NPC marker gene expression and nephrogenic potential28. Importantly,
the hNPSR-v2 medium can enrich the transient iNPCs from hPSC differentiation over serial
passages, even if the iNPCs were not purified by FACS at the beginning of the culture28. This
feature allows the derivation of iNPC lines from any hPSC line without prior genome editing to
knock in the SIX2/PAX2 dual reporter system, greatly broadening the applications.
 Long-term expanded iNPCs in hNPSR-v2 medium retain their developmental potential to
undergo their nephron fate28. First, the iNPCs are dissociated into single cells and reaggregated
to form iNPC aggregates in 96-well low-attachment U-bottom plates. The iNPC aggregates are
then transferred to Transwell culture at the air–liquid interface, a condition used for decades
for mouse kidney explant culture35,36 and for kidney organoid development6–8. To mirror
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET), the initiation step of nephron induction from
NPCs, CHIR990217,8 is used to mimic the nephron-inducing WNT9b signal from the developing
ureteric bud in vivo37. Upon the initial Wnt signaling activation, iNPCs will differentiate into
nephron structures within 2–3 weeks. Transitioning from APEL2 basal medium to advanced
RPMI 1640 medium on day 5 of organoid development can better support the structural
integrity of the organoid, especially the maintenance of nephron tubule architecture.
Supplementation of A83-01 should result in increased organoid maturity, as observed by
specific collagen markers in the podocytes and megalin (LRP2) in the proximal tubules28. Thus,
these parameters are included in the iNPC-to-nephron organoid differentiation procedures.
By following this protocol, major nephron segments are induced within 2 weeks of iNPC
differentiation, with more maturity observed after 3 weeks of differentiation.

Nature Protocols 3
