Procedure
 1 Transfer 60-d-old organoids each to one well of a suspension culture 12-well plate. Add 2 ml of OVB-organoid medium per well.
 2 Keep the plate in absolute darkness at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 24 h before ERG experiments.
 3 On the day of the ERG experiment, prepare fresh OVB organoid medium in 50 ml centrifuge tubes. Oxygenate the OVB organoid medium by
 pumping air onto the bottom of the centrifuge tube with a sterile 10 ml serological pipette for 2 min under the clean bench.
 4 Keep the room where you handle OVB organoids and perform the ERG experiment absolutely dark. Use a red light (e.g., from the western blot
 developing room) as the sole light source. If required, use an opaque box to transport OVB organoids from one dark room to another.
 5 Set up the ERG aperture and ﬁll the superfusion system with an oxygenated OVB medium81.
 6 Place organoids under red light in an electrode chamber.
 7 Place electrode chamber into the dark chamber of the ERG aperture and connect it to the superfusion system containing oxygenated OVB
 medium.
 8 Set up the speed of superfusion to 0.5 ml/min.
 Dose-dependent light sensitivity
 9 For dose-dependent light sensitivity, expose each organoid to 500 ms long ﬂashes. Start with a low intensity of 2,000 mlux (moonlight on a
 clear night), increase to 20,000 mlux (candle light) and then to 200,000 mlux (daylight on a cloudy day). Repeat each intensity three times at
 3 min intervals, and then switch to the next higher light intensity. Record all responses.
 Photic stress experiment
 10 If OVB organoids show dose-dependent responses to different light stimulation, you can continue with the photic stress experiment. Keep the
 superfusion speed at 0.5 ml/min. Continue immediately after Step 9 with the same organoids. Alternatively, start with new organoids and
 adjust the system by exposing the organoids to 500 ms ﬂashes of 200,000 mlux every 3 min for 15 min (‘pre-bright’ light) until you get a stably
 repeated light response.
 11 Desensitize the organoid in the electrode chamber by bright light exposure with a light intensity of 4,600 lux for 10 min continuously. A 150 W
 white light bulb could be used as a bright light source.
 12 Place an infrared ﬁlter between the bulb and electrode chamber to subtract the thermal impact of the bright light source.
 13 Let the organoids regenerate for 30 s in a dark chamber without light exposure after the 10 min of bright light in Step 11.
 14 Start light ﬂashes of 500 ms and 200,000 mlux every 3 min and record the responses.
 15 After 30 min of ﬂashing and recording, using the same organoids under the same conditions to repeat Step 11, but do not use bright light
 exposure, instead replacing it with 0 mlux (darkness). This can be used as a negative control for the bright light exposure procedure.
 Isolation of A-wave
 16 Set up the superfusion system containing the OVB organoid medium to a higher speed of 2 ml/min.
 17 Let organoids adjust for 36 min of equilibration time to this higher superfusion speed until they show a stable electrical signal of −200 mV as a
 response to ﬂashes of 200,000 mlux and 500 ms. Record the electric response continuously every 3 min.
 18 Add 10 mM aspartate to the medium after equilibration time is completed. Record electric response continuously. Aspartate will block the
 signal transduction from photoreceptors to the subsequent retinal cell layers (‘A-wave’).
 19 Wash out aspartate by adding OVB organoid medium without aspartate into the system. Continuously record the electric signals as responses
 to light ﬂashes.

 Pros:
 ● A shorter duration of 50–60 d compared with the majority of other protocols, which is more

 comparable to in vivo development of human embryos and makes it more feasible to conduct
 experiments in a short period
 ● A robust method to reproducibly generate brain organoids with a forebrain entity to model brain

 development and disorders from a wide variety of iPSC donors (‘Anticipated results’ section)
 ● Closer to an in vivo-like organization

 ● Easy handling protocol (no cutting, only four-stage protocol)

 ● Easy quality control check for the occurrence of dark dots/RPE

 ● Two distinct organ types (brain and eye primordium) in a single organoid

 ● Layered RPE cells

 ● Immature photoreceptors capped by RPE cells

 ● Possibility to isolate RPEs and other cell types of interest and reculture them in 2D

 ●
 Generates wide cell diversity of neuronal and non-neuronal cell types (cornea, lens, microglia)
 ●
 OVB organoids harbor the pigmented areas at one pole. This and transcriptomics also underline the
 ability of patterning and organized self-assembly of the OVB organoids
 ● Immature photoreceptors are capped by RPE and do not outwardly project, which is a unique feature

 of these OVB organoids
 ● Functionality regarding light response

 Cons:
 ● The immature retina as compared with retinal organoids

 ● Inability to generate mature photoreceptors within this culturing period of 60 d

 ● Low coverage rate for single-cell RNA (scRNA) sequencing analysis of optic cell types due to a wide

1902
