Procedure
 1 Prepare 4% PFA, DMEM/F12 prewarmed in a 37 °C water bath, PBS, 30% (wt/vol) sucrose/PBS, OCT embedding solution, plastic molds,
 super frost glass slides, poly-L-lysine (PLL) and 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate.
 2 Collect up to ﬁve OVB organoids on day 30 or day 60 in a sterile 1 ml tube. Use a cut 1,000 µl micropipette tip for transferring organoids.
 3 Remove any carried-over medium carefully with a 200 µl micropipette tip without disturbing the organoids.
 4 Wash organoids once with 1 ml of DMEM/F12 (prewarmed in a 37 °C water bath) for 3 min and remove the DMEM/F12.
 5 Add 1 ml PFA (prewarmed in a 37 °C water bath) and incubate the tube at RT for 30–60 min.
 CRITICAL STEP Do not exceed the time of PFA ﬁxation above 1 h since this will lead to high autoﬂuorescence. Use with 37 °C water bath
 c

 warmed PFA to ﬁx the organoids to enhance penetration of PFA and preserve the cytoskeleton of the cells, since cold treatment leads to
 depolymerization of microtubules.
 6 Remove PFA and wash three times with PBS-Glycine for 3 min at RT.
 PAUSE POINT Organoids can be stored for up to 2 months in PBS-Glycine at 4 °C.
 j

 7 To dehydrate organoids before freezing, add 1 ml of 30% sucrose solution and keep at 4 °C overnight. When organoids are fully dehydrated,
 they will sink down to the bottom of the tube.
 PAUSE POINT Organoids can be stored for up to 2 weeks in sucrose solution at 4 °C.
 j

 8 Prepare Tissue-Tek Cryomold containing Tissue-Tek OCT Compound solution. Transfer the dehydrated organoids with a cut 200 µl
 micropipette tip or an inoculation loop, from the sucrose solution tube into the OCT mold. Place one organoid in the center of the mold and
 orient it to either cut median or horizontal sections. The pigmented area should face the sides and not the bottom of the mold’s opening.
 9 Place the mold with organoids immediately at −80 °C for deep freezing and store them until continuing the procedure, with a minimum time
 of 24 h.
 PAUSE POINT Molds with organoids can be stored up to 1 year at −80 °C.
 j

10 Coat Superfrost slides with PLL: dilute 0.1% PLL solution 1:10 in distilled water. Soak glass slides for 5 min in 0.01% PLL at RT. Remove slides
 from the solution and dry for 2–3 h at RT.
 PAUSE POINT Store dried slides in a box at RT for up to 3 months.
 j

 11 Set up the cryosection machine (for example, Cryostat) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. We recommend that the chamber and
 holder’s temperature is 20–25 °C, and the cutting thickness is 12–16 µm. Perform sectioning: place the specimen into the cryostat holder and
 use the trimming mode until the OVB organoid is seen (faint beige with black dots). Stop trimming and set up the cutting thickness between 12
 and 16 µm, cut and place sections on the PLL precoated Superfrost slides. For this, keep the slides at RT, cut and then pick up the section with
 the RT warm slide. The frozen section will easily stick to the warm glass slide. Check for the correct orientation of the pigmented area. Let
 sections dry for 1 h at RT. Store cryosections at −80 °C until continuing the procedure, with a minimum of 2 h or long-term storage.
 PAUSE POINT Samples can be stored for up to 1 year at −80 °C.
 j

12 Before the immunostaining procedure, thaw the slides at RT and let them dry for 30 min.
 13 Wash slides twice for 3 min with PBS. You can use a Coplin jar for washing or simply add 200 µl PBS on the lying slide.
14 Incubate slides with 1% (wt/vol) sodium dodecyl sulfate in PBS for 5 min at RT.
15 Wash twice for 3 min with PBS.
16 Incubate with permeabilization solution for 10 min at RT.
17 Wash three time for 3 min with PBS-Glycine (0.225 g Glycine per 100 ml).
18 Incubate with blocking solution at RT for 1 h or at 4 °C overnight.
19 Dilute the primary antibodies in blocking solution (Table 3 or the manufacturer’s instructions). Note that nuclear staining in human organoids is
 challenging, and most of the retinal antibodies available are transcription factors, and thus are nuclear markers. Perform heat-induced antigen
 retrieval with sodium citrate buffer (10 mM sodium citrate, pH 6) and a microwave74. Phalloidin staining requires 1 hour of incubation at RT and
 light protection. No secondary antibody staining is necessary since phalloidin is conjugated with the ﬂuorophore (TRITC).
20 Add 100 µl of antibody dilution onto each slide and cover slide with Paraﬁlm (cut into slide format). Incubate at RT for a minimum of 2 h or at
 4 °C overnight.
21 Collect the primary antibody solution. Primary antibody dilutions can be stored at 4 °C and reused up to three times within 3 months.
22 Wash three times for 5 min with blocking solution.
23 Add the corresponding secondary antibody solution mixed with DAPI (dilution for both is 1:500 in blocking solution) and incubate for 1–2 h at
 RT or overnight at 4 °C protected from light.
 ! CAUTION Fluorophores of secondary antibodies are light sensitive and fade in daylight. Protect slides from this step onward from light.
24 Remove the secondary antibody solution.
25 Wash three times for 5 min with blocking solution.
26 Check brieﬂy under a microscope for nuclear staining (DAPI) and antibody signal.
27 (Optional) If co-staining, repeat steps 20–26 for the following primary/secondary antibody. For subsequent secondary antibody incubations, the
 addition of DAPI is not needed. Co-staining is highly recommended.
28 Perform a ﬁnal wash with distilled water and brieﬂy air-dry slides at RT for 10 min.
29 Add three drops of Mowiol onto the slide and place a glass coverslip (24 × 50 mm) onto the slide, carefully avoiding air bubbles.
30 Let the slide with Mowiol to dry for 1 h at RT, always protecting from light.
 31 Store slides for long-term storage at 4 °C in the dark until microscopic analysis, either with a wideﬁeld, or if accessable, preferably with a
 confocal microscope.

 are not directly differentiated from iPSCs but innately form from the forebrain-associated OVs.
 Alongside RPEs, OVB organoids offer various cell repositories of other retinal and non-retinal
 progenitors, including immature photoreceptors. Indeed, transplantation of these actively pro-
 liferative precursors might be more efﬁcient regarding engraftment and tissue repair than terminally
 differentiated cells. Meaning that after engraftment and a regeneration phase supported by the

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 Box 3 | Preparation of OVB organoids for tracing experiment ● Timing ~ 2 d
