PROTOCOL
 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-023-00814-x

 Generation of iPSC-derived human forebrain
 organoids assembling bilateral eye primordia
 Elke Gabriel 1, Walid Albanna 2,3, Giovanni Pasquini 4, Anand Ramani1, Natasa Josipovic 5,6,
 Aruljothi Mariappan1, Maria Giovanna Riparbelli 7, Giuliano Callaini 7, Celeste M. Karch 8,
 Olivier Goureau9, Argyris Papantonis 5,6, Volker Busskamp 4, Toni Schneider 2 and
 Jay Gopalakrishnan 1 ✉
 Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived brain organoids enable the developmental complexities of the human brain to be
 deconstructed. During embryogenesis, optic vesicles (OVs), the eye primordium attached to the forebrain, develop from
 diencephalon. However, most 3D culturing methods generate either brain or retinal organoids individually. Here we
 describe a protocol to generate organoids with both forebrain entities, which we call OV-containing brain organoids (OVB
 organoids). In this protocol, we ﬁrst induce neural differentiation (days 0–5) and collect neurospheres, which we culture in
 a neurosphere medium to initiate their patterning and further self-assembly (days 5–10). Then, upon transfer to spinner
 ﬂasks containing OVB medium (days 10–30), neurospheres develop into forebrain organoids with one or two pigmented
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

 dots restricted to one pole, displaying forebrain entities of ventral and dorsal cortical progenitors and preoptic areas.
 Further long-term culture results in photosensitive OVB organoids constituting complementary cell types of OVs,
 including primitive corneal epithelial and lens-like cells, retinal pigment epithelia, retinal progenitor cells, axon-like
 projections and electrically active neuronal networks. OVB organoids provide a system to help dissect interorgan
 interactions between the OVs as sensory organs and the brain as a processing unit, and can help model early eye
 patterning defects, including congenital retinal dystrophy. To conduct the protocol, experience in sterile cell culture and
 maintenance of human induced pluripotent stem cells is essential; theoretical knowledge of brain development is
 advantageous. Furthermore, specialized expertise in 3D organoid culture and imaging for the analysis is needed.

 Introduction
 Pluripotent stem cell-derived 3D human brain organoids serve as a novel type of ‘neural epithelial
 tissue mimetic’ to help dissect the complexity of how neural stem cells self-organize to form the
 human embryonic brain1–7. Besides uncovering the critical events of early brain development, these
 organoids have helped decode cellular diversities, complex interactions, neuronal networks and
 disease modeling of brain development, including microcephaly4,5,8–11. During development, the
 human embryonic nervous system typically emerges from the neural tube. With the inﬂuence of
 speciﬁc and accurate signaling events, the neural tube is ﬁrst segregated into the fore-, mid- and
 hindbrain, and the spinal cord. In vivo, the diencephalon then develops from the forebrain, from
 which the optic cups invaginate laterally. The optic cups will later form the eye12–14. Recent tissue
 engineering studies have elegantly exploited the signaling networks and generated various region-
 speciﬁc brain organoids, including retinal organoids containing photosensitive rods and cones15–22.
 However, although retinal organoids do recapitulate many features of retinal development, they
 cannot model projections of the human visual system, as they lack the downstream targets to which
 retinal ganglionic cell (RGC) axons connect. Indeed, recent work has attempted to dissect whether
 RGC axons can target cortical and thalamic organoids using an experimental system that fused both
 retinal and cortical organoids23. Notably, during brain development, the connectivity of the eye
 primordium with the brain intensiﬁes in a highly coordinated manner. Thus, the formation of
 primitive sensory structures (such as optic cups or vesicles), the development of the visual system and

 1
 Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany. 2Institute for Neurophysiology, University of
 Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 3Department of Neurosurgery, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. 4Department of Ophthalmology, Medical
 Faculty, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 5Institute of Pathology, University Medicine Göttingen, Georg-August University Göttingen, Göttingen,
 Germany. 6Center of Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 7Department of Life Sciences and Medical
 Biotechnology University of Siena, Siena, Italy. 8Department of Psychiatry, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA. 9Institut de la
 Vision, Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Paris, France. ✉e-mail: jay.gopalakrishnan@hhu.de

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 the organization of various cell types, including the connectivity of axons from RGCs to post-synaptic
 targets in the brain, have not been demonstrated within a single organoid.
 A possible limiting factor is that the optic compartment constitutes both neuronal cell types of
 photosensitive rods and cones, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and non-neuronal cell types of
 lenses and cornea24. Human eye development is a complex process involving interactions between
 neuronal and non-neuronal cell types. The optic vesicle (OV), the primordium of the eye, protrudes
 outward from the diencephalon (caudal part of the forebrain)12–14,25,26. Its position on the rostro
 caudal/dorso-ventral axis of the anterior neural tube is orchestrated by developmental signaling cues
 of BMP, WNT and SHH27. With numerous transcription factors, the OV undergoes extensive
 structural remodeling to form a layered structure named the optic cup27,28. While the outer layer
 includes the RPE, the inner layer comprises a neural retina. Other non-neuronal cell types of corneas
 and lenses originate from the surface ectoderm.
 As a sensory organ, the human eye serves/enables light perception. The light signals received and
 passed through this path are detected by photoreceptors, post-processed by retinal cells, and inte-
 grated by retinal ganglion cells whose axons are connected to the brain. The signal is transmitted via
 the optic chiasm and ultimately to the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) and the visual cortex25.
 Overall, precisely orchestrated signaling networks integrate various diverse cell types that eventually
 build this light processing path. The sensed light is then processed to form images and memories. An
 in vitro experimental system that can deconstruct some of these aspects has not been developed.
 It has been postulated that the formation of the eye results from the inherent property of the OV to
 invaginate29. We, therefore, attempted to mimic human embryogenesis and engineer brain organoids
 that assemble functionally integrated OVs. Here, we describe our protocol, on the basis of seeding
 cells at a low density in a deﬁned but undirected differentiation with a culture medium, to generate
 brain organoids with forebrain entities5. These forebrain organoids constitute dorsal and ventral brain
 progenitors, OVs functionally integrated within the forebrain via axon-like projections. Furthermore,
 the timeline to generate these OV-containing brain (OVB) organoids yielding a wide variety of cell
 types similar to the prenatal eye within 60 days correlates with human embryo development30,31. This
 protocol is versatile as we could generate OVB organoids from ﬁve different induced pluripotent stem
 cell (iPSC) donors. Thus, we hope this protocol offers an easy-to-follow method for experts wishing
 to study the developmental complexity of the human forebrain and brain-associated primitive sen-
 sory structures. In addition, we believe these next-generation brain organoids can help dissect how
 genetic mutations affect the forebrain and primitive eye development within a single organoid.

 Development of the protocol
 Numerous protocols are available to generate brain organoids from iPSCs1–7. Our group has pre-
 viously described a protocol to induce direct differentiation of iPSCs into the neural epithelium,
 omitting the embryoid body formation4,32. Brain organoids generated via this method have con-
 sistently displayed typical cytoarchitecture containing polarized radial glia, intermediate progenitors
 and ventral/cortical progenitors organized in a spatially restricted manner similar to apico-basally
 polarized ventricular zone (VZ) of the mammalian neocortex cortex4,5,32. Importantly, organoids
 generated with this method did not contain an aberrant distribution of regions such as intermixing of
 neurons in the VZ, which is a critical aspect of microcephaly that primarily arises due to premature
 differentiation of neural progenitor cells located in the VZ33,34. We found the organoids generated via
 this method are robust as we could use them to model microcephaly, neurotropic viral infections and
 glioma invasion assays4,32–34. Furthermore, gene expression studies on brain organoids generated
 with this method showed indications for the presence of retinal cell types.
 On several occasions, these organoids showed pigmented dots placed randomly across the surface
 of the organoids. We also believe that every laboratory has observed the occurrence of pigments in
 their brain organoids. This ﬁnding suggested the presence of a microenvironmental signaling cue
 within brain organoids that allows the simultaneous differentiation of retinal cell types. Indeed,
 several organoids culturing methods use a medium that contains retinoic acid that functions as a
 paracrine inhibitor of the mesenchyme during eye development35–37. Furthermore, altering the
 balance of BMP and TGFβ signaling with respective inhibitors such as dorsomorphin and SB431542
 is sufﬁcient to shift the mesodermal and endodermal signaling cues toward the ectodermal lineages38.
 From these, we also reasoned that retinoic acid or inhibiting BMP signaling from the early stages of
 neuroectoderm differentiation might allow the differentiation of pure neural types, perhaps abol-
 ishing the patterning of the eye ﬁeld and then the generation of retinal cell types. We, therefore,

 titrated the concentrations of retinoic acid and its timing of addition for its ability to induce pig-
 mented dots in our organoids reliably. An addition of 60 nM of retinol acetate around day 7, when
 neuroectoderm expands, reproducibly induced the formation of pigmented regions at around day 30.
 The primordial eye ﬁeld bulges out from the diencephalon as OVs5. Correlating this information
 with our pigmented 30-d-old organoids, we deduced that our protocol-generating brain organoids
 with eye primordium tempted us to develop them further. Upon further culturing, we observed the
 growth of pigmented areas in the organoid. When we dissected the 60-d-old OVB organoid, we found
 a rounded structure inside the pigmented region, which we could later recognize as the lens-like
 structure by immunostaining for αA/αB crystallin. We also isolated the pigmented areas and when
 cultured, we noticed that these were RPE cells.
 Consequently, we were curious whether these OVB organoids are photosensitive, and so we
 performed electroretinogram (ERG) experiments. ERG is a conventional, noninvasive diagnostic test
 to measure the electrical activity of the retina in response to light. Indeed, we detected a response
 when we stimulated OVB organoids with various light intensities5.

 Overview of the procedure
 The procedure consists of culturing and seeding iPSCs (Stage 0, Steps 1–12), and the differentiation
 (day 0) starts with the formation of neurospheres directly from iPSCs (Stage 1, Steps 13–27). At day 5,
 harvesting and further maturing the neurospheres to primitive organoids (Stage 2, Steps 28–34)
 follows. Finally, the formation of forebrain organoids with a primordial eye ﬁeld (Stage 3, Steps 35–38)
 and, lastly, the generation of OVB organoids with OVs (Stage 4, Steps 39–43) will happen.
 We also provide a protocol for quality checks of human iPSCs by immunoﬂuorescent staining (IF)
 (Box 1), and describe a step-by-step method for immunostaining (Box 2), signal transduction tracing
 experiments (Box 3), isolating and culturing RPEs (Box 4), preparing OVB organoids for single-cell and
 bulk RNA transcriptomics (Boxes 5 and 6), electron microscopy (Box 7) and electroretinography (Box 8).

 Applications of the method
 To study the human brain and eye development and disease modeling
 Primarily, our method of generating OVB organoids opens new avenues for in vitro studies of the human
 embryonic brain and eye development within a single organoid. The presence of both domains (brain and
 the eye primordium) within a single organoid enables studying the developmentally regulated interorgan
 interactions in unprecedented detail. Examples are analyzing the axonal projections emerging from the
 RGCs into the forebrain region and applying tracers in axonal pathﬁnding.
 Another outstanding advantage of these OVB organoids is that they exhibit immature photo-
 receptors and RPE cells, enabling the study of the visual cycle. For example, for light perception,
 photoreceptors transform 11-cis-retinaldehyde to all-trans-retinaldehyde. This biochemical process
 depends on the adjacent RPE cells, which can recycle all-trans-retinaldehyde and provide
 11-cis-retinaldehyde to photoreceptors again39,40. As ERG recordings of the photic stress experiment5
 (Box 8, steps 10–15) show the regeneration potential of the retina after photobleaching, the com-
 munication between the immature photoreceptor cells and the RPE cells is already established.
 Therefore, visual cycle-related diseases such as cone–rod dystrophy or Leber congenital amaurosis
 could be modeled with OVB organoids already at this stage. Further maturation of photoreceptors
 would improve the studies of these visual cycle-related diseases.
 OVB organoids are also suitable for studying the pigmentation defects of oculocutaneous albinism.
 This group of genetically inherited congenital early retinal disorders affects ~150 live births every
 year41; thus, there is an urgent need to treat early onset congenital blindness, which is often pro-
 gressive, leading to complete vision loss. Understanding the defective cellular mechanisms that trigger
 disease development in a disease-relevant experimental system is a prerequisite to designing ther-
 apeutic strategies. While pure retinal organoids have immensely helped us understand human reti-
 nogenesis and disorders, they lack in vivo-like OVs containing neuronal and non-neuronal cell types
 and layered RPEs, making them unsuitable for studying retina–forebrain interactions. On the other
 hand, OVB organoids could be helpful since the OVs are the primordium of the eye, the proximal end
 of which is attached to the forebrain. This unique aspect could also greatly beneﬁt dissecting
 developmental disorders that affect both brain and eye primordia, such as coloboma of the eye, heart
 defects, atresia of the choanae, restriction of growth and development, and ear abnormalities
 (CHARGE) syndrome, septo-optic dysplasia, holoprosencephaly and cyclopia due to defects in signal
 segregations.

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 Box 1 | IF of human iPSCs for pluripotency ● Timing: ~7 d
