Protocol


 • All cultures should be regularly monitored for bacterial, mycoplasma and fungal
 contamination.
 • Perform quality-control experiments to verify patterning and specification by using qPCRs
 for brain region–specific genes.
 • Examine the experimental framework for modeling with organoids and assembloids that
 was outlined as part of a consensus effort27.

Validation of candidate genes
Validation of candidate genes from the KO screen can be time consuming, because it involves
the generation of isogenic KO hiPS cell lines and their neural differentiation. Here, we introduce
a practical CRISPR–Cas9–based strategy to generate a KO cell pool for validation. Specifically,
we used Synthego’s gene KO kit, which designs three sgRNAs targeting each candidate gene to
induce concurrent double-strand breaks. We optimized the nucleofection protocol to achieve
high-efficiency delivery of sgRNAs and Cas9 protein into hiPS cells, generating a cell pool with
a high proportion of KO cells for the targeted gene. This KO cell pool is then used to validate
specific phenotypes.

Expertise needed to implement the protocol
Successful execution of CRISPR screening in neural organoids and assembloids requires expertise
across several domains. The first is proficiency in hiPS cell culture, differentiation into regionalized
neural organoids, and integration of organoids into assembloids. The second is experience with
lentiviral production and transduction, genetic engineering of hiPS cell lines (e.g., knock-in
reporters or Cas9 expression) and large-scale pooled library delivery. Downstream workflows
also require expertise in fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). Finally, analysis involves
extracting and processing genomic DNA from organoids, preparing samples for next-generation
sequencing (NGS) and performing computational analyses to assess sgRNA enrichment.


Materials

Biological materials
 • Human iPS cells. The hiPS cells (CAG::Cas9;Dlxi1/2b::eGFP cell line, parental line: 1205-4)
 used to generate the results shown in this protocol were derived at Stanford University and
 validated by using standard methods (pluripotency assays and genome integrity). This
 cell line is available upon request. Details on its generation can be found in the original
 publication reporting this cell line16.
 ▲ CAUTION The experiments using hiPS cells in this study were approved by the Stanford
 University School of Medicine Institutional Review Board and the Stem Cell Research
 Oversight.
 ▲ CAUTION Check cells lines regularly to ensure that they are authentic and are not infected
 with mycoplasma.
 • Pooled lentivirus library. For this study, we cloned five sgRNAs targeting each of the 438
 genes of interest and an extra 10% ‘safe’ harbor-targeting negative control sgRNAs into a
 lentiviral plasmid vector that constitutively expresses the sgRNA and mCherry (pMCB320,
 Addgene, cat. no. 89359). We obtained the sgRNA sequences for our genes of interest
 and negative controls from a human CRISPR KO library that we previously published35.
 Lentivirus was produced in human embryonic kidney 293T cells using standard protocols.
 ▲ CAUTION Lentivirus is often considered a biosafety level 2 or higher material and should
 be handled appropriately. Check the safety regulations in your institution.

Reagents
For cell culture
 • Vitronectin recombinant human protein, truncated (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
 cat. no. A14700)

Nature Protocols 7
