Methods
 Cortical organoid arealization experiment
Tissue source Two genetically normal iPS cell lines (1323-4 and H28126) were differ-
De-identified tissue samples were collected with previous patient con- entiated into cortical organoids following the above protocol up to day
sent in strict observance of the legal and institutional ethical regula- 35. At day 35, organoids from each line were split into three different
tions. Protocols were approved by the Human Gamete, Embryo, and conditions: 1) normal medium conditions for day 35 and beyond as
Stem Cell Research Committee (institutional review board) at the Uni- described above (with vitamin A); 2) normal medium conditions for
versity of California, San Francisco. day 35 and beyond (with vitamin A) plus 100 μM DEAB, an inhibitor of
 RA synthesis; or 3) normal medium conditions for day 35 and beyond as
Nucleus isolation from fresh primary tissue described above except using B27 without vitamin A. DEAB treatment
Cortical areas were microdissected from three specimens of was ended after one week, and culture conditions remained othermid-gestation human cortex, in addition to three specimens of wise the same until day 70, at which time organoids were processed
non-area-specific mid-gestation human cortex. Tissue was dissociated for scRNA-seq and fixed for immunohistochemistry. We used 1323-4
in Papain containing DNase I (DNase) for 30 min at 37 °C and samples organoids for scRNA-seq (one for each of the three conditions) and
were triturated to form a single-cell suspension. Cells (106) were pel- both 1323-4 and H28126 organoids were used for immunostaining.
leted and lysed for 3 min in 100 μl chilled lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl Organoids processed for scRNA-seq were multiplexed using multi-seq
pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Tween-20, 0.1% Igepal CA-630, oligonucleotide barcoding59 and pooled for library preparation and
0.01% digitonin, 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA)). Lysed cells were then sequencing to reduce potential batch effects.
washed with 1 ml chilled wash buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM
NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Tween-20, 1% BSA) and nuclei were pelleted at Single-cell RNA-seq library preparation and sequencing
500g for 5 min at 4 °C. Single-cell RNA-seq libraries were generated using the 10X Genomics
 Chromium 3′ Gene Expression Kit. In brief, single cells were loaded
Nucleus isolation from frozen primary tissue onto chromium chips with a capture target of 10,000 cells per sample.
Tissue sections were snap frozen and stored at −80 °C. Nuclei were iso- Libraries were prepared following the provided protocol and sequenced
lated from frozen tissues as described57. In brief, frozen tissue samples on an Illumina NovaSeq with a targeted sequencing depth of 50,000
were thawed in 2 ml chilled homogenization buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.8, reads per cell. BCL files from sequencing were then used as inputs to
5 mM CaCl2, 3 mM magnesium acetate, 320 mM sucrose, 0.1 mM EDTA, the 10X Genomics Cell Ranger pipeline.
0.1% NP40, 167 μM β-mercaptoethanol, 16.7 μM PMSF) and lysed in a
pre-chilled dounce. Cell lysates were then centrifuged in an iodixanol Bulk ATAC-seq library preparation and sequencing
gradient for 20 min at 3,000g at 4 °C in a swinging bucket centrifuge Bulk ATAC-seq libraries were generated as described57. In brief, 50,000
with the brake turned off. The nucleus band was then carefully pipetted nuclei were permeablized and tagmented. Tagmented chromatin
and nuclei were diluted in wash buffer. libraries were generated and sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq with
 a target sequencing depth of 50 million reads per library. Sequencing
Cortical organoid differentiation data were used as an input to the ENCODE ATAC-seq analysis pipeline
Cortical organoids were cultured using a forebrain-directed differentia- (https://github.com/ENCODE-DCC/atac-seq-pipeline).
tion protocol47,58. In brief, two genetically normal human iPS cell lines
(H28126 (Gilad Laboratory, University of Chicago) and 1323-4 (Conklin Bulk H3K27ac CUT&Tag library preparation and sequencing
Laboratory, Gladstone Institutes)), which were previously authenti- H3K27ac CUT&Tag libraries were prepared as previously described60,
cated47, and the embryonic stem cell line H1 (WiCell, authenticated at with modifications. In brief, cells were dissociated from human developsource), were expanded and dissociated into single cells using accutase. ing cortical tissue as described above. Fifty thousand cell aliquots were
Cells tested negative for mycoplasma. After dissociation, cells were pelleted at 600g in a swinging bucket rotor centrifuge and washed twice
reconstituted in neural induction medium at a density of 10,000 cells per in 200 μl CUT&Tag wash buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl,
well in 96-well v-bottom low-adhesion plates. Glasgow’s modified Eagle’s 0.5 mM spermidine, 1× protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). Nuclei
medium (GMEM)-based neural induction medium includes 20% Knock- were isolated by resuspending cell pellets in 200 μl dig-wash buffer
out Serum Replacer (KSR), 1× non-essential amino acids, 0.11 mg/ml (CUT&Tag wash buffer supplemented with 0.05% digitonin and 0.05%
sodium pyruvate, 1× penicillin-streptomycin, 0.1 mM β-mercaptoethanol, IGEPAL CA-630). Nucleus pellets were washed twice in 200 μl dig-wash
5 μM SB431542 and 3 μM IWR1-endo. Medium was supplemented with buffer before resuspension in 100 μl dig-wash buffer supplemented
20 μM Rock inhibitor Y-27632 for the first 6 days. After 18 days, organoids with 2 mM EDTA and a 1:50 dilution of H3K27ac primary antibody (Cell
were transferred from 96- to 6-well low-adhesion plates, moved to an Signaling 8173), and incubated overnight at 4 °C on an overhead rotaorbital shaker rotating at 90 rpm, and changed to Dulbecco’s modified tor. Excess primary antibody was removed by pelleting the nuclei at
Eagle’s medium (DMEM)/F12-based medium containing 1× glutamax, 600g and washing twice in 200 μl dig-wash buffer. Secondary antibody
1× N2, 1× B27 without vitamin A and 1× antibiotic–antimycotic (anti-anti). (Novex A16031) was added at a dilution of 1:50 in 100 μl dig-wash buffer
At 35 days, organoids were moved into DMEM/F12-based medium con- and nuclei were incubated at room temperature for 30 min while rotattaining 1× N2, 1× B27 with vitamin A and 1× anti-anti. Throughout the ing. Excess secondary antibody was removed by pelleting the nuclei at
culture duration, organoids were fed every other day. 600g and washing twice in 200 μl dig-wash buffer. pA-Tn5 was added
 at a dilution of 1:100 in 100 μl dig-med buffer (0.05% digitonin, 20 mM
Nucleus isolation from cerebral organoids HEPES, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM spermidine, 1× protease inhibitor
Cerebral organoids were dissociated in papain containing DNase cocktail), and nuclei were incubated at room temperature for 1 h while
I (DNase) for 30 min at 37 °C and samples were triturated to form a rotating. Unbound pA-Tn5 was removed by pelleting the nuclei at 300g
single-cell suspension. Cells (106) were pelleted and lysed for 3 min in and washing twice in 200 μl dig-med buffer. Nuclei were resuspended
100 μl chilled lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM in 100 μl tagmentation buffer (10 mM MgCl2 in dig-med buffer) and
MgCl2, 0.1% Tween-20, 0.1% Igepal CA-630, 0.01% digitonin, 1% BSA). incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. After tagmentation, nuclei were lysed with the
Lysed cells were then washed with 1 ml chilled wash buffer (10 mM addition of 100 μl DNA binding buffer (Zymo Research), and tagmented
Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Tween-20, 1% BSA) and DNA was purified with a 1.5:1 ratio of AMPure XP beads (Beckman) folnuclei were pelleted at 500g for 5 min at 4 °C. lowing the manufacturer’s instructions. Purified DNA was eluted in

21 μl buffer EB (10 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.5) and mixed with 2 μl each 10 μM A k-nearest neighbour graph was constructed from the latent dimenindexed i5 and i7 primers and 25 μl NEBNext HiFi 2 × PCR Master mix. sions from scAlign using k = 15. The Leiden algorithm was then used to
Libraries were amplified with the cycling conditions: 72 °C for 5 min; identify ‘communities’, or clusters, in the sample, representing groups
98 °C for 30 s; 12 cycles of 98 °C for 10 s and 63 °C for 30 s; final exten- of cells likely to be of the same cell type using resolution 0.8.
sion at 72 °C for 1 min and hold at 4 °C. Libraries were purified with a
1:1 ratio of AMPure XP beads and eluted in 15 μl EB. CUT&Tag libraries Calculating gene activity scores. To create a proxy for gene expreswere quantified by Agilent Bioanalyzer, and sequenced paired-end to sion, ATACseq fragments in the gene body plus promoter (2 kb upstream
a depth of 15 million reads on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 system, with from transcription start sites) of all protein-coding genes were summed
read lengths 50 × 8 × 8 × 50. for each cell to generate ‘gene activity scores’. A matrix was constructed
 for all gene activity scores by all cells. Owing to the sparsity of scATAC-
Single-cell ATAC-seq library preparation and sequencing seq data, the MAGIC63 imputation method was used, as implemented
Nuclei were prepared as outlined in the 10X Genomics Chromium in the SnapATAC package, to impute gene activity scores based on the
single-cell ATAC-seq solution protocol (v1.0 kit was used). Nuclei were k-nearest neighbour graph.
loaded with a capture target of 10,000 nuclei per sample. scATAC-seq
libraries were prepared for sequencing following the 10X Genomics Assigning cell type labels to scATAC-seq cells. Broad cell-type
single-cell ATAC–seq solution protocol. scATAC-seq libraries were classes were assigned to cells on the basis of the gene activity scores
sequenced using PE150 sequencing on an Illumina NovaSeq with a of previously described cell-type marker genes2 (Extended Data Fig. 2a).
target depth of 25,000 reads per nucleus (Supplementary Table 1). To identify cell types at a higher resolution, we assigned cell-type labels
 using the CellWalker17 method, as implemented in CellWalkR (v0.1.7).
Single-cell ATAC-seq analysis pipeline In brief, we used CellWalker to integrate scRNA-seq derived labels2 with
Cell Ranger. BCL files generated from sequencing were used as inputs scATAC-seq data by building a network of label-to-cell and cell-to-cell
to the 10X Genomics Cell Ranger ATAC pipeline. In brief, FASTQ files edges and diffusing label information over this combined network
were generated and aligned to GRCh38 using BWA. Fragment files were to compensate for data sparsity in single-cell data. We calculated
generated containing all unique properly paired and aligned fragments cell-to-cell edge weight using the Jaccard similarity between cells.
with mapping quality (MAPQ) >30. Each unique fragment was associ- Label-to-cell weight was calculated as the sum of the products of the
ated with a single cell barcode. gene activity scores for that cell and the log fold-change in expression
 of each marker for that cell label. We tuned label edge weight using cell
SnapATAC. Fragment files generated from the Cell Ranger ATAC pipe- homogeneity as described17. Diffusion resulted in a vector of influence
line were loaded into the SnapATAC61 pipeline (https://github.com/ scores of each label for each cell. We then smoothed these vectors
r3fang/SnapATAC) and Snap files were generated. A cell-by-bin matrix for each cell by taking a weighted average of its scores with those of
was then generated for each sample by segmenting the genome into each of its ten closest neighbours (weighted such that each neighbour
5-kb windows and scoring each cell for reads in each window. Cells were contributed one-fifth as much as the cell in question) in UMAP space.
filtered based on log(reads passed filters) between 3 and 5 and fraction Finally, we assigned cell-type labels to each cell using the label with
of reads in promoters between 10 and 60% to obtain cells with high the highest influence.
quality libraries. Bins were then filtered, removing bins overlapping EN-
CODE blacklist regions (http://mitra.stanford.edu/kundaje/akundaje/ Peak calling. Fragments from cells were grouped together by broad
release/blacklists/). This matrix was then binarized and coverage of cell class (RG, IPC, ulEN, dlEN, endo/mural, astro/oligo, nEN, IN-MGE,
each bin was calculated and normalized by log10(count + 1). Z-scores IN-CGE, MGE progenitor, insular, microglia) and peaks were called on
were calculated from normalized bin coverages and bins with a Z-score all cluster fragments using MACS2 (https://github.com/taoliu/MACS)
beyond ± 2 were filtered from further analysis. Cells with coverage of with the parameters ‘--nomodel --shift -37 --ext 73 --qval 5e-2 -B --SPMR
<500 bins were removed from the downstream analysis. A cell-by-cell --call-summits’. Peaks from each cell type were then combined, mergsimilarity matrix was generated by calculating the latent semantic ing overlapping peaks, to form a master peak set, and a cell-by-peak
index (LSI) of the binarized bin matrix. Singular value decomposition matrix was constructed. This matrix was binarized for all downstream
(SVD) was performed on the log (term frequency – inverse document applications.
frequency) (TF − IDF) matrix. The top 50 reduced dimensions were
used for batch correction through scAlign. Determination of differentially accessible peaks. Differentially
 accessible peaks for each cell type were determined by performscAlign batch correction. Multiple batches were integrated using the ing a two-sided Fisher’s exact test and selecting peaks that had
scAlign package16 (https://github.com/quon-titative-biology/scAlign). log-transformed fold-change >0, and FDR-corrected P < 0.05, using
The ATAC batches were first merged together to calculate the latent the built in function in snapATAC ‘findDAR’.
semantic index (LSI) with the transcription factor matrix log-scaled for
input into SVD. The 50 reduced dimensions of LSI were used as inputs Visualizing cluster signal in peaks. The deeptools suite64 (https://
to the encoder. The latent dimension was set at 32 and ran with all-pairs deeptools.readthedocs.io/en/develop/) was used to visualize pileups of
alignment of all batches. The input dimension to the encoder was set cluster-specific ATAC-seq signal (output from MACS2) in DA peak sets.
to 50 to match the input dimensions and trained to 15,000 iterations
using the small architecture setting with batch normalization. The Intersection with 25-chromatin-state model. To comprehensively
32 dimensions were used for downstream analysis for finding neigh- categorize our peaks in genomic features genome-wide, we intersected
bours. The scRNA-seq were processed using Seurat and computed our peak set with the 25-state model from the Roadmap Epigenomthe top 15 components from CCA for input into scAlign, and the latent ics Project18, specifically using the data generated from sample E081,
dimension was set to 20 using the small architecture with batch nor- which was a sample of developing human brain. Enrichment of peaks
malization and 15,000 iterations. All alignments were unsupervised. within annotated regions of the genome was calculated using the ratio
 between the (number of bases in state AND overlap feature)/(number of
Clustering and visualization. To visualize the high-dimensionality bases in genome) and the [(number of bases overlap feature)/(number
dataset in 2D space, the latent dimensions for the ATAC and RNA data of bases in genome) × (number of bases in state)/(number of bases in
from scAlign were used to construct UMAP62 graphs from Seurat. genome)] as previously described18.

Article
 ignoring duplicates and unmapped reads. Heat maps were then gener-
Intersection with epigenomic datasets. We intersected our peak ated using the ‘plotCorrelation’ function.
sets with several epigenomic datasets including ATAC-seq peaks
from de la Torre-Ubieta et al.9 (GEO: GSE95023), ATAC-seq peaks from scRNA-seq/scATAC-seq co-embedding. To anchor mRNA expression
Markenscoff-Papadimitriou et al.23 (GEO: GSE149268), H3K4me3 PLAC– and chromatin state profiles in the same map of cell diversity, we apseq promoter-interacting regions, generated from ENs, INs, IPCs, and plied scAlign on datasets where we profiled scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq
RGs sorted from samples of developing human cortex21 that were gra- in parallel in the same sample. This was achieved by linking gene expresciously provided by the author, H3K27ac peaks from Amiri et al.11 (taken sion data to gene activity scores derived from chromatin accessibility
from supplementary tables of publication), ATAC-seq peaks from Trevi- data. The gene activity scores were logRPM values derived from gene
no et al.49 (GEO: GSE132403), H3K27ac peaks from Li et al.22 (obtained activity scores generated by the SnapATAC pipeline. Then the gene
from http://development.psychencode.org), and high-confidence expression and gene activity scores were processed using Seurat, and
enhancer predictions from Wang et al.24 (obtained from http://resource. then split into batches for input into scAlign. The encoder space was
psychencode.org/). Any peaks not already mapped to hg38 were lifted computed using multi CCA of the 10 dimensions with latent dimensions
over using the UCSC LiftOver tool. Overlaps between peak sets were at 20 using the ‘small’ architecture.
determined using the ‘findOverlaps’ function in R.
 Pseudotime analysis. The Monocle 3 R package68 (https://cole-
Transcription factor motif enrichment analysis. The findMotifsGe- trapnell-lab.github.io/monocle3/) was used for pseudotime calculanome.pl tool from the HOMER suite65 (http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/) tion of the co-embedded RNA and ATAC dataset. The RG cells were
was used to identify transcription factor motif enrichments in peak set as the root cells. The minimum branch length was 9 in the graph
sets. The ChromVAR26 R package was used to identify transcription building. Monocle 3 was also used for the pseudotime calculation
factor motif enrichments at the single-cell level in scATAC-seq data. In of the scRNA-seq PFC/V1 dataset. The Cicero package69 (https://
brief, the peak-by-cell matrix from the snap object was used as an input, cole-trapnell-lab.github.io/cicero-release/) was used for the pseudofiltering for peaks open in at least 10 cells. Biased-corrected transcrip- time calculation of the scATAC-seq PFC/V1 dataset.
tion factor motif deviations were calculated for the set of 1,764 human
transcription factor motifs for each cell. Identification of temporally dynamic peaks in the excitatory
 neuronal lineage. scATAC-seq cells from V1 samples used in the
Predicted enhancer–gene interactions. The activity-by-contact co-embedding analysis were divided into ten equal bins by pseudo-
(ABC) model20 (https://github.com/broadinstitute/ABC-Enhancer- time. Average accessibility for each peak for each bin was determined.
Gene-Prediction) was used for prediction of enhancer–gene interac- Peaks were considered temporally dynamic if they met the following
tions from scATAC-seq data. Cell-type-specific ATAC-seq signal and criteria: accessible in a minimum of 10% of cells in the bin with the highpeak outputs from MACS2 were used as inputs. Bulk H3K27ac CUT&Tag est accessibility; accessible in a maximum of 20% of cells in the bin
libraries generated from similar samples (see ‘Bulk H3K27ac CUT&Tag with the lowest accessibility; at least a difference of 10% in proportion
library preparation and sequencing’ above) were used as a mark for ac- of cells where the peak was accessible between the lowest and highest
tive enhancers. Publicly available Hi-C data generated from similar sam- accessibility bins; and had an increase in proportion of accessibility in
ples19 were used to demarcate regulatory neighbourhoods, using the cells of at least 3× between the lowest and highest accessibility bins. In
highest resolution available for each chromosome. Cell-type-specific total 25,415 out of 459,953 peaks met these criteria and were deemed
gene expression profiles were generated from publicly available to be temporally dynamic in the cortical excitatory neuronal lineage.
scRNA-seq data generated from similar samples2 by averaging expression across each cell type. The default threshold of 0.02 was used for Comparison of accessibility, gene expression, and transcription
calling enhancer–gene interactions. factor motif enrichment across pseudotime. As pseudotime was
 calculated on the co-embedded space of ATAC and RNA cells, we can
VISTA enhancer intersections. VISTA enhancers were taken from the directly compare temporal changes in gene expression, gene activity
VISTA Enhancer Browser25 (https://enhancer.lbl.gov/) and filtered for scores calculated from open chromatin, and transcription factor motif
human sequences found to be active in the forebrain. Enhancers were enrichment. For each of the genes, we calculated gene activity scores
lifted over to Hg38 using the UCSC LiftOver tool (https://genome.ucsc. using Cicero69 and calculated a 1,000-cell moving average across pseuedu/cgi-bin/hgLiftOver) and overlapping regions were merged, result- dotime from the ATAC cells. This value was normalized to represent a
ing in 319 unique regions. These regions were intersected with the peak proportion of the maximum value. For gene expression, we calculated a
set from all primary scATAC-seq cells and 304 peaks that overlapped 1,000-cell moving average across pseudotime from the RNA cells. This
with VISTA forebrain enhancer regions were identified. value was normalized to represent a proportion of the maximum value.
 For transcription factor motif enrichment, using Z-scores from Chrom-
Genomic feature annotations. The ChIPSeeker R package66 (https:// VAR, we calculated a 1,000-cell moving average of the motif enrichment
bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/ChIPseeker.html) was across pseudotime from the ATAC cells. LOESS regression lines were fit
used to annotate all peak sets in genomic features. to the moving average data. For the generation of heat maps, a similar
 approach was used, except values were averaged within 20 equally sized
Gene ontology. Identification of enriched biological processes in genes bins of pseudotime and normalized the maximum value.
near to sets of cell-type-specific enhancer predictions was performed
using the GREAT alogrithm67. For each cell type, peaks that were both Branchpoint analysis. URD70 (https://github.com/farrellja/URD/) was
predicted enhancers and cell-type-specific were identified, and en- used to compare the branchpoints of ATAC and RNA independently.
richment of biological processes in the flanking genes of the regions Deep-layer neurons were not considered during this analysis owing
relative to a background set of the full primary peak set was identified. to obfuscating identities, and the batch-corrected values were used
 as input to the diffusion map calculations to combat batch effects.
Calculating sample correlations. Correlation between samples was Diffusion parameters were set to 150 nearest neighbours, and sigma
determined using the ‘multiBamSummary’ function from the deeptools was autocalculated from the data. The tree was constructed using
python suite64 on sample bam files. Bam file comparison was limited to 200 cells per pseudotime bin, 6 bins per pseudotime window, and
the genomic space of the merged primary peak set (n = 459,953 peaks), branch point P value threshold of 0.001.

transcription start sites. Gene regions were defined using Gencode
Identification of homologous cell types in primary and organoid V27. The total number of peaks in each gene plus upstream regulatory
samples. To identify homologous cell types between primary and or- region was quantified per gene for each cell type and compared to the
ganoid scATAC-seq datasets, reads from organoid cells were counted in number of peaks in the merged peak set for each gene set using Fisher’s
peaks defined in the primary dataset, providing matching peak-by-cell exact test. The peaks in the remaining gene plus promoter regions were
matrices for primary and organoid datasets. DA peaks were then identi- used as background. Gene sets from Coe et al.30 (COE253), Kaplanis
fied in each dataset for each cluster as described above, and the inter- et al.56 (DDD299) and SFARI gene (https://gene.sfari.org/database/
section of this DA peak set was used to calculate correlations between human-gene/) were used for enrichment testing. P values were Bonferprimary and organoid clusters after averaging peak accessibility across roni corrected for multiple tests (number of peak sets).
all cells in each cluster. Homologous cell types were then determined
on the basis of the highest correlation values for each cluster. Morbidity map CNV enrichment. CNVs enriched in NDD cases from
 Coe et al.30 (n = 70) were intersected with peak sets using bedtools
Single-cell RNA-seq analysis 2.24.0; peaks were required to have a 50% overlap with the CNV region.
Seurat. For primary samples used in Figs. 2, 3, scRNA-seq data were The total number of peaks overlapping a CNV were compared to the
preprocessed using a minimum of 500 genes and 5% mitochondrial number of peaks that did not overlap with a CNV for each cell type.
cutoff and Scrublet71 for doublet removal. The SCTransform72 workflow The full primary peak set was used as background and compared by
in Seurat73 was run separately on each batch. Canonical component Fisher’s exact test. P values were Bonferroni corrected for multiple
analysis (CCA) on the Pearson residuals from SCTransform was used as tests (number of peak sets).
input into scAlign for batch correction. Dimensionality reduction and
clustering were performed using PCA and Leiden, respectively, using Cell-type-specific GWAS enrichment testing. We retrieved GWAS
the default parameters of the Seurat pipeline. For organoid samples summary statistics for schizophrenia (Ripke et al.27), bipolar disorder
used in the arealization experiment in Fig. 3, libraries from different (Stahl et al.35), and ASD (Grove et al.33) from the Psychiatric Genomics
conditions were demultiplexed using the Multi-seq pipeline (https:// Consortium data portal (https://www.med.unc.edu/pgc). We also obgithub.com/chris-mcginnis-ucsf/MULTI-seq). The normal SCTrans- tained GWAS summary statistics for schizophrenia (Pardiñas et al.32)
form workflow was then applied, as described above. Genes that were from http://walters.psycm.cf.ac.uk/. GWAS summary statistics for
differentially expressed between conditions were identified using the major depression (Howard et al.34) were obtained from the authors
‘FindMarkers’ function with ‘MAST’ selected as the method. For orga- under the auspices of a Data Use Agreement between 23AndMe and
noid samples used for validation (Extended Data Fig. 10), scRNA-seq the University of Maryland Baltimore. We applied stratified LD score
data were integrated following the Seurat SCTransform integration regression (LDSC version 1.0.175,76) to these summary statistics to evaluworkflow using default parameters. ate the enrichment of trait heritability in each of ten predicted enhancer
 sets. These associations were adjusted for the union of the peak sets as
Classification of area identity of organoid cells. To systematically well as for 52 annotations from version 1.2 of the LDSC baseline model
determine whether organoid cells had a transcriptomic identity more (including genic regions, enhancer regions and conserved regions76).
closely aligned with human PFC or V1 cells, we implemented a previ- Associations that met a cutoff of FDR <0.05 were considered significant.
ously described classifier method42. In brief, area gene modules defined
on the basis of area-associated gene expression patterns2,42 were gener- TAD enrichment. Odds ratios were calculated as the likelihood of a
ated and module eigengene values were determined for each organoid TAD containing an ATAC peak if it also contained a gene from the set
excitatory neuron using the ‘moduleEigengenes’ function from the denoted by the subplot title, with significance identified using a Fisher’s
WGCNA R package74. Organoid cells were then assigned an identity of exact test. The magenta dotted line indicates a significance threshold
‘PFC’ or ‘V1’ using the higher module eigengene value for each module. of P < 0.05. Gene sets were obtained from http://resource.psychen-
The significance of differences in proportions of identity labels between code.org/24,31. TAD sets were from human brain, germinal zone (GZ)
treatments was determined using a two-sided χ2 test (P < 0.05). and cortical plate (CP)19.

Disease intersection Immunohistochemistry
DNM enrichment. Peak sets were intersected with DNMs from 2,708 Samples used for immunostaining were fixed in 4% PFA for 45 min,
probands and 1,876 siblings using bedtools v2.24.0. DNMs were identi- washed out with PBS, and incubated overnight in a 30% sucrose solution
fied using an in-house pipeline. In brief, variants from whole-genome at 4 °C. Samples were then embedded in a 1:1 solution of OCT and 30%
sequencing data were called using four independent callers: GATK v3.8, sucrose and frozen at −80 °C until ready for sectioning. Cryosections
FreeBayes, Strelka, and Platypus. Variant calls from each caller were were prepared at a thickness of 16 μm. Heat-induced antigen retrieval
intersected, and filtered for read depth (>9), allele balance (>0.25), was performed in 10 mM sodium citrate (pH 6.0) for 15 min. Permeaabsence of reads supporting the mutation in parents, and identified bilization was performed in PBS (pH 7.4) supplemented with 2% Triton
by at least three of the four callers. X-100. Primary and secondary antibodies were diluted and incubated
 Sets of cell-type-specific peaks and peaks that overlapped with PLAC– in PBS (pH 7.4) supplemented with 10% donkey serum, 2% Triton X-100,
seq promoter-interacting regions were tested for enrichment of DNMs and 0.2% gelatin. Primary antibodies used in this study included: mouse
in probands as compared to a background peak set which contained all anti-AUTS2 (1:200, Abcam ab243036), rabbit anti-NR2F1 (1:100, Novus
primary peaks. We used Fisher’s exact test to compare the number of Biologicals NBP1-31259), mouse anti-SATB2 (1:250, Santa Cruz Biopeaks with one or more DNMs between the cell-type-specific peak set technology SC-81376), rat anti-CTIP2 (1:500, abcam AB18465), rabbit
and the background peak set. We also performed a Wilcoxon rank sum anti-FOXG1 (1:500, Abcam ab196868), and rabbit anti-PAX6 (1:200,
test comparing the number of DNMs per peak in the cell-type-specific Biolegend 901301). Secondary antibodies used were AlexaFluor secset to the background peak set. We applied a Bonferroni multiple test ondary antibodies. Images were collected using Leica SP5 confocal
correction to all P values. system and processed using ImageJ/Fiji.

ASD/NDD gene set enrichment. We created gene plus upstream Reporting summary
regulatory regions using bedtools v2.24.0, where we defined the up- Further information on research design is available in the Nature
stream regulatory region as the 100-kb region upstream of the gene Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.

Article
 67. McLean, C. Y. et al. GREAT improves functional interpretation of cis-regulatory regions.
Data availability Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 495–501 (2010).
 68. Cao, J. et al. The single-cell transcriptional landscape of mammalian organogenesis.
scATAC-seq and scRNA-seq data derived from primary human samples Nature 566, 496–502 (2019).
are available on the NeMO archive (https://assets.nemoarchive.org/ 69. Pliner, H. A. et al. Cicero predicts cis-regulatory DNA interactions from single-cell
 chromatin accessibility data. Mol. Cell 71, 858–871.e8 (2018).
dat-gnot1gb) and the psychENCODE Knowledge Portal (https://www. 70. Farrell, J. A. et al. Single-cell reconstruction of developmental trajectories during
synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn21392931). scATAC-seq and scRNA-seq data zebrafish embryogenesis. Science 360, eaar3131 (2018).
derived from cortical organoids are also available on the psychENCODE 71. Wolock, S. L., Lopez, R. & Klein, A. M. Scrublet: computational identification of cell
 doublets in single-cell transcriptomic data. Cell Syst. 8, 281–291.e9 (2019).
Knowledge Portal (https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn21392931) 72. Hafemeister, C. & Satija, R. Normalization and variance stabilization of single-cell RNA-seq
and GEO (GSE163018). Peak level scATAC-seq primary and organoid data using regularized negative binomial regression. Genome Biol. 20, 296 (2019).
ATAC-seq data are available through the UCSC Cell Browser (https:// 73. Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. & Satija, R. Integrating single-cell
 transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species. Nat.
cortex-atac.cells.ucsc.edu/) and UCSC Genome Browser (https://urlde- Biotechnol. 36, 411–420 (2018).
fense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=https-3A__genome.ucsc.edu_s_Max_ 74. Langfelder, P. & Horvath, S. WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation network
cortex-2Datac&d=DwIBaQ&c=iORugZls2LlYyCAZRB3XLg&r=wIGwA analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 9, 559 (2008).
 75. Finucane, H. K. et al. Heritability enrichment of specifically expressed genes identifies
13tJ0H_yBH_8fGR_aHDv_Lb9BdBvaGRmKuMfC8&m=C-AKivMuKdU- disease-relevant tissues and cell types. Nat. Genet. 50, 621–629 (2018).
2JxBfFMIkS53e2NDAh9SJrG2tdmW5_MU&s=Sg2BoS6TTUoAMLyXia 76. Finucane, H. K. et al. Partitioning heritability by functional annotation using genome-wide
M6hGHhNtG9LqaUBpXoPQxWBuQ&e=). association summary statistics. Nat. Genet. 47, 1228–1235 (2015).


 Acknowledgements We thank A. Bhaduri for help with generation of scRNA-seq data and its
Code availability analysis, and discussions throughout the project; M. Andrews for sharing organoid cultures;
 M. Song and Y. Shen for sharing PLAC–seq promoter-interacting regions for intersection with
Custom codes used in this study are available at the following GitHub our data; and J. Rubenstein for reading of the manuscript. This study was supported by NIH
repository: https://github.com/NOW-Lab/scATACcortex. awards: psychENCODE award U01MH116438, Brain Initiative award U01MH114825, and the
 Psychiatric Cell Map Initiative Convergence Neuroscience award U01MH115747, NIMH award
 R01MH109907 (N.A. and K.S.P.), an Autism Speaks Predoctoral Fellowship (11874 to R.S.Z.),
57. Corces, M. R. et al. An improved ATAC-seq protocol reduces background and enables
 a Simons Foundation grant (SFARI 491371 to T.J.N.), an NARSAD Young Investigator Grant
 interrogation of frozen tissues. Nat. Methods 14, 959–962 (2017).
 (to T.J.N.), gifts from Schmidt Futures and the William K. Bowes Jr Foundation, the Gladstone
58. Kadoshima, T. et al. Self-organization of axial polarity, inside-out layer pattern, and
 Institutes, the National Institute of Mental Health (1K99MH117165 to T.N.T.), the US NIH
 species-specific progenitor dynamics in human ES cell–derived neocortex. Proc. Natl
 (R01 MH101221 to E.E.E.) and 5U41HG002371-19 to M.H.
 Acad. Sci. 110, 20284–20289 (2013).
59. McGinnis, C. et al. MULTI-seq: Scalable sample multiplexing for single-cell RNA
 Author contributions R.S.Z. and T.J.N. designed the experiments. R.S.Z. and J.M.R. performed
 sequencing using lipid-tagged indices. Nat. Methods 16, 619–626 (2019).
 all experiments. D.B. generated CUT&TAG data. D.S. assisted in organoid differentiation. R.S.Z.
60. Kaya-Okur, H. S. et al. CUT&Tag for efficient epigenomic profiling of small samples and
 and C.N.K. performed the majority of data analysis. P.F.P., K.C.K., and K.S.P. contributed to
 single cells. Nat. Commun. 10, 1930 (2019).
 study design and performed data analysis. A.W., T.N.T., A.K., A.M.C., S.A.A., and E.E.E.
61. Fang, R. et al. Comprehensive analysis of single cell ATAC-seq data with SnapATAC. Nat.
 performed the disease intersection analyses. R.S.Z., C.N.K., N.A, and T.J.N. wrote the paper
 Commun. 112, 1337 (2021).
 with input from all authors. M.H. built the cell browser interface. T.J.N. and N.A. supervised the
62. McInnes, L., Healy, J. & Melville, J. UMAP: uniform manifold approximation and projection
 project.
 for dimension reduction. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03426 (2018).
63. van Dijk, D. et al. Recovering gene interactions from single-cell data using data diffusion.
 Cell 174, 716–729.e27 (2018). Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
64. Ramírez, F. et al. deepTools2: a next generation web server for deep-sequencing data
 analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, W160–W165 (2016). Additional information
65. Heinz, S. et al. Simple combinations of lineage-determining transcription factors prime Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at
 cis-regulatory elements required for macrophage and B cell identities. Mol. Cell 38, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03209-8.
 576–589 (2010). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to T.J.N.
66. Yu, G., Wang, L.-G. & He, Q.-Y. ChIPseeker: an R/Bioconductor package for ChIP Peer review information Nature thanks Flora Vaccarino, Christopher Walsh, Wing H. Wong and
 peak annotation, comparison and visualization. Bioinformatics 31, 2382–2383 Qiangfeng Zhang for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
 (2015). Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.

Extended Data Fig. 1 | See next page for caption.

Article
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Batch correction and quality control metrics for calculated in the space of the merged primary peak set (n = 459,953 peaks).
primary scATAC-seq data. a, Density curve of fragment size distribution for f, Heat map of all-by-all correlations between primary single-cell data
deduplicated, uniquely mapped fragments that passed quality filters for each aggregated by area of origin. Correlation was calculated in the space of the
sample. b, Plot of promoter ratio against ln(read depth) for all cell barcodes merged primary peak set (n = 459,953 peaks). g, h, UMAP projections of all
detected. Cells were included in downstream analysis that had a promoter primary scATAC-seq cells before (g) and after (h) batch correction coloured by
ration of 10–60% and ln(read depth) of 3–5. Red lines indicate upper and lower sample (see Methods). i, UMAP projection of log(read depth) for deduplicated,
thresholds. c, Histogram of cellular coverage in 5-kb genomic bins for all cells. uniquely mapped reads that passed quality filters on all primary scATAC-seq
Cells with reads in fewer than 500 bins were removed from downstream cells. j, UMAP projection of fraction of fragments in peaks on all primary
analysis. d, Heat map of all-by-all Pearson correlations between all samples that scATAC-seq cells. k, UMAP projection of all primary scATAC-seq cells coloured
had bulk libraries prepared in parallel. Bulk and aggregate single-cell libraries by condition (fresh or frozen). l, Bar plot depicting the proportion of cells from
for each sample are included. Correlation was calculated in the space of the each brain region for each Leiden cluster for all primary scATAC-seq cells.
merged primary peak set (n = 459,953 peaks). e, Heat map of all-by-all Pearson m, Heat map of all-by-all Pearson correlations between clusters. Correlation is
correlations between all aggregate single-cell libraries. Correlation was calculated in the space of all primary peaks (n = 459,953).

Extended Data Fig. 2 | Batch Correction of primary scATAC-seq samples. b, UMAP projections of all primary scATAC-seq cells that passed quality control
a, UMAP projections of all primary scATAC-seq cells that passed quality control after batch correction with all cells from each sample coloured in red.
before batch correction with all cells from each sample coloured in red.

Article


Extended Data Fig. 3 | See next page for caption.

Extended Data Fig. 3 | Gene activity scores correlate with cell type-specific on integration with scRNA-seq data. c, UMAP projection of cell-type labels
expression of marker genes. a, UMAP projections of all primary scATAC-seq assigned by CellWalker. d, UMAP projection of radial glia with cell-type
cells coloured by gene activity score. From top left to bottom right: NKX2.1 assignments from CellWalker. e, UMAP projections of gene activity scores for
(also known as NKX2-1) marking MGE cells, AQP4 marking glia/astrocytes, TBR1 PAX6 and GLI3, genes that are ubiquitously expressed in radial glia; HOPX, an
marking excitatory neurons, FEZF2 marking deep layer excitatory neurons, oRG-specific gene2; and CRYAB, a tRG-specific gene2. f, UMAP projection of
HES1 marking radial glia, HOPX marking outer radial glia, SATB2 marking Z-scores of enrichment of oRG- and tRG-specific peaks (Fisher’s exact, twoupper layer excitatory neurons, CCL4 marking microglia, CRYAB marking sided test, P < 0.05). g, UMAP projections of Z-scores of enrichment of areatruncated radial glia, LHX6 marking MGE-derived interneurons, OLIG1 marking specific peaks for each area in all primary scATAC-seq cells (Fisher’s exact,
oligodendrocyte precursors, and SOX2 marking radial glia. b, Schematic of the two-sided test, P < 0.05).
CellWalker algorithm17 used to assign cell-type labels to scATAC-seq cells based

Article


Extended Data Fig. 4 | See next page for caption.

Extended Data Fig. 4 | Annotation of primary scATAC-seq peaks. cell-type-specific peaks (Fisher’s exact, two-sided, FDR < 0.05) for each broad
a, Distribution of primary scATAC-seq peaks in genomic features. cell type. f, Browser tracks highlighting cell-type-specific predicted enhancers.
b, Distribution of primary scATAC-seq peaks around transcription start sites. Left, highlighting predicted enhancers linked to SOX2 in RGs that are not
c, Bar plot of log(fold enrichment) of primary scATAC-seq peaks in chromatin present in ulENs. Right, highlighting a predicted enhancer for GRIN2B that is
states. Chromatin states defined by the 25-state model from Roadmap present in ulENs and not RGs. g, h, Bar plots of −log10(P) of gene ontology
Epigenomics18 (see Methods). d, Intersection of cell-type-specific peaks biological processes that are enriched in cell-type-specific predicted
(Fisher’s exact, two sided, FDR < 0.05), predicted enhancer peaks enhancers of MGE-derived interneurons (g) and RGs (h) (see Methods).
(see Methods), and peaks overlapping promoter-interacting regions identified i, Heat map of Z-scores of transcription factor motif enrichments of key
by H3K4me3 PLAC–seq21. e, UMAP projections of Z-scores of enrichment of lineage-associated transcription factors in each cluster.

Article


Extended Data Fig. 5 | scATAC-seq peaks overlap with previously annotated proportions of predicted enhancers for each cell type (see Methods) present in
bulk ATAC-seq peaks and validated forebrain enhancers. a–c, Overlap of all the overlapping set. d, Venn diagram of overlap of all predicted enhancers
primary peaks with the peak set from de la Torre-Ubieta et al.9 (a), Li et al. 22 (b), (see Methods) with gene-linked enhancers from Amiri et al.11, high confidence
and Markenscoff-Papadimitriou et al. 23 (c). Left to right: Venn diagram of enhancers from Wang et al. 24, and putative regulatory elements from
overlaps, UMAP projection of Z-scores of enrichment of overlapping peaks in Markenscoff-Papadimitriou et al. 23. e, Venn diagram of overlaps of VISTA
all primary scATAC-seq cells, bar plot of proportions of cell-type-specific peaks forebrain enhancers25 with all primary scATAC-seq peaks, and all predicted
(Fisher’s exact, two-sided, FDR < 0.05) present in overlapping set, bar plot of enhancers (see Methods).

Extended Data Fig. 6 | See next page for caption.

Article
Extended Data Fig. 6 | Enrichment and depletion of disease associated peaks for each cell type in ASD probands compared with unaffected siblings.
variants in scATACseq peaks. a–c, Enrichment and depletion of cell-type- DNM data from a total of 2,767 probands and 1,855 unaffected siblings were
specific peaks (a), peaks that overlap with H3K4me3 PLAC–seq interactions21 included in the analysis. No tests reached Bonferroni significance. Bars
(b) and cell-type-specific peaks that overlap with H3K4me3 PLAC–seq represent 95% CI. f, Enrichment and depletion of predicted enhancer peaks in
interactions21 (c) (Fisher’s exact, two-sided, FDR < 0.05) in promoter and gene copy number variant (CNV) regions enriched in paediatric cases of NDD30
regions of genes associated with ASD and NDD, including genes enriched in (n = 70 NDD-associated CNVs). No tests reached Bonferroni significance. Bars
DNMs (SFARI845, DDD2996056, COE25361 30). Asterisks indicate tests that pass represent 95% CI. g, Enrichment of cell-type-specific enhancers located in
Bonferroni significance. d, Enrichment and depletion of DNMs in predicted TADs with neurodevelopmental disease-associated genes31 (left) and
enhancer peaks for each cell type in ASD probands compared with unaffected schizophrenia-associated genes24 (right). Three distinct sets of TADs were used
siblings. DNM data from a total of 2767 probands and 1855 unaffected siblings (top to bottom): TADs defined in the cortical plate (CP) of developing human
were included in the analysis. No tests reached Bonferroni significance. Bars cortex, TADs defined in the germinal zone (GZ) of developing human cortex,
represent 95% CI. e, Enrichment and depletion of DNMs in cell-type-specific and TADs defined in adult cortex19.

Extended Data Fig. 7 | Dynamic patterns of gene expression, chromatin equally sized bins and expression, activity scores and deviations are averaged
accessibility, and transcription factor motif enrichment across across all cells in each bin. Deviation scores determined using ChromVAR 26
pseudotime. a–c, Heat map of normalized expression (a), normalized gene (Methods). d, e, Heat maps of correlations between gene expression and gene
activity scores (b) and deviation scores of motif enrichments (c) of 40 key activity scores for 40 key lineage transcription factors (d) and for 615 cell-type
lineage transcription factors across pseudotime. Pseudotime is binned into 20 marker genes (e).

Article


Extended Data Fig. 8 | Chromatin state profiling reveals divergence of PFC IPCs (h). i, j, Projection of NHLH1, PPP1R17, and NEUROD4 gene activity scores
and V1 excitatory lineages. a–d, UMAP projections of scATAC-seq cells from on PFC and V1 scATAC-seq cells (i) and scRNA-seq cells (j) ordered by
PFC and V1 samples before batch correction coloured by sample (a), after batch pseudotime with PFC/V1 divergence branch points displayed. k, Volcano plot
correction coloured by sample (b), coloured by Leiden cluster (c) and coloured of peaks that are differentially accessible between PFC and V1 IPCs. Peaks
by gene activity score for EOMES, a marker of IPCs (d). e–h, UMAP projections highlighted in red have log-transformed fold change (logFC) > 0.5 and
of scRNA-seq cells from PFC and V1 samples before batch correction coloured FDR < 0.05 (n = 1,819). l, Volcano plot of genes that are differentially expressed
by sample (e), after batch correction coloured by sample (f), coloured by between PFC and V1 IPCs. Genes highlighted in red have logFC > 0.5 and
Leiden cluster (g) and coloured by gene activity score for EOMES, a marker of FDR < 0.05 (n = 11).

Extended Data Fig. 9 | See next page for caption.

Article
Extended Data Fig. 9 | Modelling the PFC–V1 split in the developing cortex. group classified as more PFC-like or more V1-like on the basis of calculation of
a, b, UMAP projections of Z-scores of enrichment of PFC-specific peaks module eigengene values for area-specific modules (see Methods). Asterisks
(a; n = 4,176) and V1-specific peaks (b; n = 21,030) in all PFC and V1 scATAC-seq indicate significant differences in proportions (DEAB: PFC, 1,160/2,622; V1,
cells (Fisher’s exact, two-sided, FDR < 0.05). c, Top enriched transcription 1,462/2,622; NoVA: PFC, 563/1,556; V1, 993/1,556; VA: PFC, 1,831/2,976; V1,
factor motifs in V1-specific peak set as determined by HOMER (hypergeometric 1,145/2,976) (χ2 test, one-sided, vitamin A versus no vitamin A: P = 3.209 × 10–59;
test, one-sided). d, UMAP projection of ChromVAR deviation scores of motif vitamin A versus DEAB: P = 2.79 × 10 −38). h, Violin plots depicting expression
enrichment of MEF2C in all PFC and V1 scATAC-seq cells. e, UMAP projection of levels of SATB2, NR2F1, and NR2F2 for excitatory neurons from each treatment
scRNA-seq data from organoids (n = 3) cultured in the presence of vitamin A, group. i, Heat map showing gene expression of differentially expressed genes
without the presence of vitamin A, and in the presence of DEAB. Cells coloured between excitatory neurons cultured with and without vitamin A. j, Images of
by cluster. f, Schematic depiction of classifier method used to assign area organoids cultured with and without vitamin A stained with DAPI and
identity to organoid cells on the basis of defined area-specific gene modules. immunostained for NR2F1 and AUTS2. All images taken at 10× resolution.
g, Bar plot depicting proportion of excitatory neurons from each treatment Representative images shown from n = 3 lines.

Extended Data Fig. 10 | See next page for caption.

Article
Extended Data Fig. 10 | Comparison of organoid and primary peaks reveal scATAC-seq dataset but not in the primary scATAC-seq dataset. h, UMAP
significant differences in chromatin landscapes. a, Representative image of projection of Z-scores of enrichment of peaks that are present in the primary
organoid (1323-4 line depicted) immunostained for FOXG1, a marker of cortical scATAC-seq dataset but not in the organoid scATAC-seq dataset. i, Genome
identity. Image taken at 10× resolution. Representative image shown from n = 3 browser tracks depicted a predicted enhancer of SOX2 that is present in both
lines. b, Density curves of fragment size distributions for each organoid the full and down-sampled primary RGs but not detected in organoid RGs.
sample. Fragments are deduplicated, uniquely mapped fragments that have j, UMAP projection of scRNA-seq data from the same three organoid lines used
passed quality filters (see Methods). c, UMAP projection of all organoid for scATAC-seq analysis coloured by line (n = 19,509 cells). k, UMAP projection
scATAC-seq cells coloured by cluster. d, UMAP projection of log(read depth). of scRNA-seq data coloured by cluster. l, UMAP projection of normalized gene
Fragments are deduplicated, uniquely mapped fragments that have passed expression of PAX6, SOX2, EOMES, and NEUROD2. Maximum value was set at the
quality filters (see Methods). e, Bar plot depicting the proportions of cells in 99th quantile. m, Bar plot depicting the proportions of cells in each cluster
each cluster from each organoid sample. f, Venn diagram of overlaps of all from each organoid sample. n, UMAP projection of normalized gene
primary scATAC-seq peaks, all organoid scATAC–seq peaks, all H3K27ac peaks expression of FOXG1 split by organoid line. Maximum value was set at the 99th
from Amiri et al.11, and all ATAC-seq peaks from Trevino et al.49. g, UMAP quantile.
projection of Z-scores of enrichment of peaks that are present in the organoid
