PROTOCOL
 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-023-00814-x


 Generation of iPSC-derived human forebrain
 organoids assembling bilateral eye primordia
 Elke Gabriel 1, Walid Albanna 2,3, Giovanni Pasquini 4, Anand Ramani1, Natasa Josipovic 5,6,
 Aruljothi Mariappan1, Maria Giovanna Riparbelli 7, Giuliano Callaini 7, Celeste M. Karch 8,
 Olivier Goureau9, Argyris Papantonis 5,6, Volker Busskamp 4, Toni Schneider 2 and
 Jay Gopalakrishnan 1 ✉
 Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived brain organoids enable the developmental complexities of the human brain to be
 deconstructed. During embryogenesis, optic vesicles (OVs), the eye primordium attached to the forebrain, develop from
 diencephalon. However, most 3D culturing methods generate either brain or retinal organoids individually. Here we
 describe a protocol to generate organoids with both forebrain entities, which we call OV-containing brain organoids (OVB
 organoids). In this protocol, we ﬁrst induce neural differentiation (days 0–5) and collect neurospheres, which we culture in
 a neurosphere medium to initiate their patterning and further self-assembly (days 5–10). Then, upon transfer to spinner
 ﬂasks containing OVB medium (days 10–30), neurospheres develop into forebrain organoids with one or two pigmented
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;


 dots restricted to one pole, displaying forebrain entities of ventral and dorsal cortical progenitors and preoptic areas.
 Further long-term culture results in photosensitive OVB organoids constituting complementary cell types of OVs,
 including primitive corneal epithelial and lens-like cells, retinal pigment epithelia, retinal progenitor cells, axon-like
 projections and electrically active neuronal networks. OVB organoids provide a system to help dissect interorgan
 interactions between the OVs as sensory organs and the brain as a processing unit, and can help model early eye
 patterning defects, including congenital retinal dystrophy. To conduct the protocol, experience in sterile cell culture and
 maintenance of human induced pluripotent stem cells is essential; theoretical knowledge of brain development is
 advantageous. Furthermore, specialized expertise in 3D organoid culture and imaging for the analysis is needed.


 Introduction
 Pluripotent stem cell-derived 3D human brain organoids serve as a novel type of ‘neural epithelial
 tissue mimetic’ to help dissect the complexity of how neural stem cells self-organize to form the
 human embryonic brain1–7. Besides uncovering the critical events of early brain development, these
 organoids have helped decode cellular diversities, complex interactions, neuronal networks and
 disease modeling of brain development, including microcephaly4,5,8–11. During development, the
 human embryonic nervous system typically emerges from the neural tube. With the inﬂuence of
 speciﬁc and accurate signaling events, the neural tube is ﬁrst segregated into the fore-, mid- and
 hindbrain, and the spinal cord. In vivo, the diencephalon then develops from the forebrain, from
 which the optic cups invaginate laterally. The optic cups will later form the eye12–14. Recent tissue
 engineering studies have elegantly exploited the signaling networks and generated various region-
 speciﬁc brain organoids, including retinal organoids containing photosensitive rods and cones15–22.
 However, although retinal organoids do recapitulate many features of retinal development, they
 cannot model projections of the human visual system, as they lack the downstream targets to which
 retinal ganglionic cell (RGC) axons connect. Indeed, recent work has attempted to dissect whether
 RGC axons can target cortical and thalamic organoids using an experimental system that fused both
 retinal and cortical organoids23. Notably, during brain development, the connectivity of the eye
 primordium with the brain intensiﬁes in a highly coordinated manner. Thus, the formation of
 primitive sensory structures (such as optic cups or vesicles), the development of the visual system and

 1
 Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany. 2Institute for Neurophysiology, University of
 Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 3Department of Neurosurgery, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. 4Department of Ophthalmology, Medical
 Faculty, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 5Institute of Pathology, University Medicine Göttingen, Georg-August University Göttingen, Göttingen,
 Germany. 6Center of Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 7Department of Life Sciences and Medical
 Biotechnology University of Siena, Siena, Italy. 8Department of Psychiatry, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA. 9Institut de la
 Vision, Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Paris, France. ✉e-mail: jay.gopalakrishnan@hhu.de

 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1893

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 the organization of various cell types, including the connectivity of axons from RGCs to post-synaptic
 targets in the brain, have not been demonstrated within a single organoid.
 A possible limiting factor is that the optic compartment constitutes both neuronal cell types of
 photosensitive rods and cones, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and non-neuronal cell types of
 lenses and cornea24. Human eye development is a complex process involving interactions between
 neuronal and non-neuronal cell types. The optic vesicle (OV), the primordium of the eye, protrudes
 outward from the diencephalon (caudal part of the forebrain)12–14,25,26. Its position on the rostro
 caudal/dorso-ventral axis of the anterior neural tube is orchestrated by developmental signaling cues
 of BMP, WNT and SHH27. With numerous transcription factors, the OV undergoes extensive
 structural remodeling to form a layered structure named the optic cup27,28. While the outer layer
 includes the RPE, the inner layer comprises a neural retina. Other non-neuronal cell types of corneas
 and lenses originate from the surface ectoderm.
 As a sensory organ, the human eye serves/enables light perception. The light signals received and
 passed through this path are detected by photoreceptors, post-processed by retinal cells, and inte-
 grated by retinal ganglion cells whose axons are connected to the brain. The signal is transmitted via
 the optic chiasm and ultimately to the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) and the visual cortex25.
 Overall, precisely orchestrated signaling networks integrate various diverse cell types that eventually
 build this light processing path. The sensed light is then processed to form images and memories. An
 in vitro experimental system that can deconstruct some of these aspects has not been developed.
 It has been postulated that the formation of the eye results from the inherent property of the OV to
 invaginate29. We, therefore, attempted to mimic human embryogenesis and engineer brain organoids
 that assemble functionally integrated OVs. Here, we describe our protocol, on the basis of seeding
 cells at a low density in a deﬁned but undirected differentiation with a culture medium, to generate
 brain organoids with forebrain entities5. These forebrain organoids constitute dorsal and ventral brain
 progenitors, OVs functionally integrated within the forebrain via axon-like projections. Furthermore,
 the timeline to generate these OV-containing brain (OVB) organoids yielding a wide variety of cell
 types similar to the prenatal eye within 60 days correlates with human embryo development30,31. This
 protocol is versatile as we could generate OVB organoids from ﬁve different induced pluripotent stem
 cell (iPSC) donors. Thus, we hope this protocol offers an easy-to-follow method for experts wishing
 to study the developmental complexity of the human forebrain and brain-associated primitive sen-
 sory structures. In addition, we believe these next-generation brain organoids can help dissect how
 genetic mutations affect the forebrain and primitive eye development within a single organoid.


 Development of the protocol
 Numerous protocols are available to generate brain organoids from iPSCs1–7. Our group has pre-
 viously described a protocol to induce direct differentiation of iPSCs into the neural epithelium,
 omitting the embryoid body formation4,32. Brain organoids generated via this method have con-
 sistently displayed typical cytoarchitecture containing polarized radial glia, intermediate progenitors
 and ventral/cortical progenitors organized in a spatially restricted manner similar to apico-basally
 polarized ventricular zone (VZ) of the mammalian neocortex cortex4,5,32. Importantly, organoids
 generated with this method did not contain an aberrant distribution of regions such as intermixing of
 neurons in the VZ, which is a critical aspect of microcephaly that primarily arises due to premature
 differentiation of neural progenitor cells located in the VZ33,34. We found the organoids generated via
 this method are robust as we could use them to model microcephaly, neurotropic viral infections and
 glioma invasion assays4,32–34. Furthermore, gene expression studies on brain organoids generated
 with this method showed indications for the presence of retinal cell types.
 On several occasions, these organoids showed pigmented dots placed randomly across the surface
 of the organoids. We also believe that every laboratory has observed the occurrence of pigments in
 their brain organoids. This ﬁnding suggested the presence of a microenvironmental signaling cue
 within brain organoids that allows the simultaneous differentiation of retinal cell types. Indeed,
 several organoids culturing methods use a medium that contains retinoic acid that functions as a
 paracrine inhibitor of the mesenchyme during eye development35–37. Furthermore, altering the
 balance of BMP and TGFβ signaling with respective inhibitors such as dorsomorphin and SB431542
 is sufﬁcient to shift the mesodermal and endodermal signaling cues toward the ectodermal lineages38.
 From these, we also reasoned that retinoic acid or inhibiting BMP signaling from the early stages of
 neuroectoderm differentiation might allow the differentiation of pure neural types, perhaps abol-
 ishing the patterning of the eye ﬁeld and then the generation of retinal cell types. We, therefore,

1894 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 titrated the concentrations of retinoic acid and its timing of addition for its ability to induce pig-
 mented dots in our organoids reliably. An addition of 60 nM of retinol acetate around day 7, when
 neuroectoderm expands, reproducibly induced the formation of pigmented regions at around day 30.
 The primordial eye ﬁeld bulges out from the diencephalon as OVs5. Correlating this information
 with our pigmented 30-d-old organoids, we deduced that our protocol-generating brain organoids
 with eye primordium tempted us to develop them further. Upon further culturing, we observed the
 growth of pigmented areas in the organoid. When we dissected the 60-d-old OVB organoid, we found
 a rounded structure inside the pigmented region, which we could later recognize as the lens-like
 structure by immunostaining for αA/αB crystallin. We also isolated the pigmented areas and when
 cultured, we noticed that these were RPE cells.
 Consequently, we were curious whether these OVB organoids are photosensitive, and so we
 performed electroretinogram (ERG) experiments. ERG is a conventional, noninvasive diagnostic test
 to measure the electrical activity of the retina in response to light. Indeed, we detected a response
 when we stimulated OVB organoids with various light intensities5.


 Overview of the procedure
 The procedure consists of culturing and seeding iPSCs (Stage 0, Steps 1–12), and the differentiation
 (day 0) starts with the formation of neurospheres directly from iPSCs (Stage 1, Steps 13–27). At day 5,
 harvesting and further maturing the neurospheres to primitive organoids (Stage 2, Steps 28–34)
 follows. Finally, the formation of forebrain organoids with a primordial eye ﬁeld (Stage 3, Steps 35–38)
 and, lastly, the generation of OVB organoids with OVs (Stage 4, Steps 39–43) will happen.
 We also provide a protocol for quality checks of human iPSCs by immunoﬂuorescent staining (IF)
 (Box 1), and describe a step-by-step method for immunostaining (Box 2), signal transduction tracing
 experiments (Box 3), isolating and culturing RPEs (Box 4), preparing OVB organoids for single-cell and
 bulk RNA transcriptomics (Boxes 5 and 6), electron microscopy (Box 7) and electroretinography (Box 8).


 Applications of the method
 To study the human brain and eye development and disease modeling
 Primarily, our method of generating OVB organoids opens new avenues for in vitro studies of the human
 embryonic brain and eye development within a single organoid. The presence of both domains (brain and
 the eye primordium) within a single organoid enables studying the developmentally regulated interorgan
 interactions in unprecedented detail. Examples are analyzing the axonal projections emerging from the
 RGCs into the forebrain region and applying tracers in axonal pathﬁnding.
 Another outstanding advantage of these OVB organoids is that they exhibit immature photo-
 receptors and RPE cells, enabling the study of the visual cycle. For example, for light perception,
 photoreceptors transform 11-cis-retinaldehyde to all-trans-retinaldehyde. This biochemical process
 depends on the adjacent RPE cells, which can recycle all-trans-retinaldehyde and provide
 11-cis-retinaldehyde to photoreceptors again39,40. As ERG recordings of the photic stress experiment5
 (Box 8, steps 10–15) show the regeneration potential of the retina after photobleaching, the com-
 munication between the immature photoreceptor cells and the RPE cells is already established.
 Therefore, visual cycle-related diseases such as cone–rod dystrophy or Leber congenital amaurosis
 could be modeled with OVB organoids already at this stage. Further maturation of photoreceptors
 would improve the studies of these visual cycle-related diseases.
 OVB organoids are also suitable for studying the pigmentation defects of oculocutaneous albinism.
 This group of genetically inherited congenital early retinal disorders affects ~150 live births every
 year41; thus, there is an urgent need to treat early onset congenital blindness, which is often pro-
 gressive, leading to complete vision loss. Understanding the defective cellular mechanisms that trigger
 disease development in a disease-relevant experimental system is a prerequisite to designing ther-
 apeutic strategies. While pure retinal organoids have immensely helped us understand human reti-
 nogenesis and disorders, they lack in vivo-like OVs containing neuronal and non-neuronal cell types
 and layered RPEs, making them unsuitable for studying retina–forebrain interactions. On the other
 hand, OVB organoids could be helpful since the OVs are the primordium of the eye, the proximal end
 of which is attached to the forebrain. This unique aspect could also greatly beneﬁt dissecting
 developmental disorders that affect both brain and eye primordia, such as coloboma of the eye, heart
 defects, atresia of the choanae, restriction of growth and development, and ear abnormalities
 (CHARGE) syndrome, septo-optic dysplasia, holoprosencephaly and cyclopia due to defects in signal
 segregations.

NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1895

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 Box 1 | IF of human iPSCs for pluripotency ● Timing: ~7 d
 Procedure
 1 While culturing human iPSCs, prepare a sterile 24-well plate and place sterile glass coverslips (12 mm diameter) onto the bottom of each well.
 Prepare at least six wells.
 2 Add 300 µl Matrigel/DMEM/F12 solution, described in the Reagent setup, per well of the 24-well plate. Incubate for 1 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in
 an incubator.
 3 Aspirate the Matrigel solution and add 500 µl of mTESR1 medium and 10 µM Rock inhibitor (Y-27632 2HCl) per well.
 4 Passage your iPSCs as usual and seed one drop of cell suspension with 1 ml serological pipette into each Matrigel-coated and mTeSR1 (including
 Rock inhibitor) ﬁlled well. Place the 24-well plate into the incubator (37 °C, 5% CO2) and do not move the plate for the next 24–48 h. Check for
 cell attachment after 2 d and then change medium daily.
 5 When iPSC colonies/patches have reached a diameter of 200–500 µm, proceed with the ﬁxation.
 6 Aspirate the medium and gently add 500 µl DMEM/F12 (prewarmed in a 37 °C warm water bath) to each well.
 7 Aspirate the DMEM/F12 and gently add 500 µl PFA (prewarmed in a 37 °C warm water bath) gently to each well without detaching the cells.
 8 Incubate the plate for 10 min at RT.
 9 Aspirate the PFA carefully and gently add 500 µl PBS-Glycine to wash out the PFA. Repeat the washing step two more times.
 CRITICAL Perform the washing steps carefully not to detach the ﬁxed adherent cells.
 c


10 Aspirate the PBS-Glycine after the third time washing and add 500 µl of permeabilization solution. Incubate for 10 min at RT.
 11 Aspirate the permeabilzation solution and wash three times with 500 µl PBS-Glycine.
12 Aspirate the PBS-Glycine after the third time of washing and add 500 µl of blocking solution.
 PAUSE POINT Store plate at 4 °C for up to 2 weeks wrapped with Paraﬁlm to prevent evaporation and drying out of the ﬁxed cells, or
 j


 proceed with the immunostaining after 1 h incubation at RT with blocking solution.
 13 Dilute the ﬁrst primary antibody as recommended, for example, OCT4 in blocking buffer. Recommended markers to check for pluripotency of
 human iPSCs are OCT4 (POU5F1), Nanog, SSEA4, Tra-1-60 and/or Tra-1-81.
14 Aspirate the blocking solution and add 200 µl of antibody dilution into a well. Incubate at RT for 1 h or overnight at 4 °C in a refrigerator or
 cold room.
15 Aspirate the primary antibody dilution and wash three times with 500 µl of blocking solution.
16 Aspirate the blocking solution after the third washing step and add 500 µl of secondary antibody dilution (for details, see antibody table).
 Incubate for 1 h at RT and protect from light.
 CRITICAL Keep plate in the dark from now on because secondary antibodies are light sensitive and will bleach out, resulting in signal
 c


 loss later.
17 Aspirate the secondary antibody dilution and wash three times with blocking solution.
18 Repeat steps 14–18 for the next primary and secondary antibodies. Add 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) or Hoechst 33342 dye (both Life
 technologies) at a ﬁnal concentration of 0.1–0.5 µg/ml or 1–5 µg/ml, respectively, for nuclear staining to the last secondary antibody incubation.
19 Aspirate the blocking solution after the third washing step and add 500 µl distilled water to each well.
20 Remove the glass cover slip from each well carefully with tweezers and place it with the cells on top on a paper for 5 min at RT and protected
 from light.
21 Take a glass slide and add a 3 µl drop of Mowiol. Take the coverslip with tweezers without scratching the center (touch only the rim), ﬂip the
 coverslip and place it with the cell side onto the Mowiol on the glass slide. Place the coverslip slowly to prevent air bubbles. Let it dry for
 15–30 min at RT and protected from light.
22 Continue imaging with a ﬂuorescence microscope.
 PAUSE POINT Alternatively, store slides at 4 °C in refrigerator or cold room protected from light for up to 6 months until imaging.
 j


 Finally, OVB organoids can also allow the study of complex electric circuitry development and the
 visual pathway, as they harbor light-sensitive cells (neural retina with cells expressing GAD6), cell
 types representing light signal processing nuclei (lateral geniculate nuclei expressing PCP4) and
 perhaps primitive visual cortex (cells expressing TGS2, SLC24A3, THBS2 and NNF)5.

 Drug testing and environmental effects
 Successful disease modeling with OVB organoids would enable using them as a preclinical human
 model to test the agents that can mitigate or rescue clinically relevant phenotypes without animal
 trials. These may include the application of gene delivery such as adeno-associated viral delivery of
 genes, anti-sense oligonucleotides and translational readthrough drugs. Furthermore, when generated
 from clinical patient iPSCs, the patient-speciﬁc OVB organoids could serve as a platform for per-
 sonalized therapy testing. This has an advantage of studying the effect of patient mutations and
 avoids interspecies differences if using conventional preclinical models with animals since it is from
 the patient material. Finally, OVB organoids could be used as a toolkit for analyzing environmental
 impacts on the human embryonic brain and eye development, such as neurotropic viral infections,
 pollution, chemicals, radiation and gravity.

 Tissue engineering and potential stem cell replacement therapy
 iPSCs-derived RPE cells have already been transplanted into a patient with exudative age-related
 macular degeneration and polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy42. However, the quality and stability of
 cells differentiated in 2D versus 3D still need to be discovered. Moreover, in our protocol, RPE cells

1896 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 Box 2 | IF of OVB organoids ● Timing 3–6 d
 Procedure
 1 Prepare 4% PFA, DMEM/F12 prewarmed in a 37 °C water bath, PBS, 30% (wt/vol) sucrose/PBS, OCT embedding solution, plastic molds,
 super frost glass slides, poly-L-lysine (PLL) and 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate.
 2 Collect up to ﬁve OVB organoids on day 30 or day 60 in a sterile 1 ml tube. Use a cut 1,000 µl micropipette tip for transferring organoids.
 3 Remove any carried-over medium carefully with a 200 µl micropipette tip without disturbing the organoids.
 4 Wash organoids once with 1 ml of DMEM/F12 (prewarmed in a 37 °C water bath) for 3 min and remove the DMEM/F12.
 5 Add 1 ml PFA (prewarmed in a 37 °C water bath) and incubate the tube at RT for 30–60 min.
 CRITICAL STEP Do not exceed the time of PFA ﬁxation above 1 h since this will lead to high autoﬂuorescence. Use with 37 °C water bath
 c


 warmed PFA to ﬁx the organoids to enhance penetration of PFA and preserve the cytoskeleton of the cells, since cold treatment leads to
 depolymerization of microtubules.
 6 Remove PFA and wash three times with PBS-Glycine for 3 min at RT.
 PAUSE POINT Organoids can be stored for up to 2 months in PBS-Glycine at 4 °C.
 j


 7 To dehydrate organoids before freezing, add 1 ml of 30% sucrose solution and keep at 4 °C overnight. When organoids are fully dehydrated,
 they will sink down to the bottom of the tube.
 PAUSE POINT Organoids can be stored for up to 2 weeks in sucrose solution at 4 °C.
 j


 8 Prepare Tissue-Tek Cryomold containing Tissue-Tek OCT Compound solution. Transfer the dehydrated organoids with a cut 200 µl
 micropipette tip or an inoculation loop, from the sucrose solution tube into the OCT mold. Place one organoid in the center of the mold and
 orient it to either cut median or horizontal sections. The pigmented area should face the sides and not the bottom of the mold’s opening.
 9 Place the mold with organoids immediately at −80 °C for deep freezing and store them until continuing the procedure, with a minimum time
 of 24 h.
 PAUSE POINT Molds with organoids can be stored up to 1 year at −80 °C.
 j


10 Coat Superfrost slides with PLL: dilute 0.1% PLL solution 1:10 in distilled water. Soak glass slides for 5 min in 0.01% PLL at RT. Remove slides
 from the solution and dry for 2–3 h at RT.
 PAUSE POINT Store dried slides in a box at RT for up to 3 months.
 j


 11 Set up the cryosection machine (for example, Cryostat) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. We recommend that the chamber and
 holder’s temperature is 20–25 °C, and the cutting thickness is 12–16 µm. Perform sectioning: place the specimen into the cryostat holder and
 use the trimming mode until the OVB organoid is seen (faint beige with black dots). Stop trimming and set up the cutting thickness between 12
 and 16 µm, cut and place sections on the PLL precoated Superfrost slides. For this, keep the slides at RT, cut and then pick up the section with
 the RT warm slide. The frozen section will easily stick to the warm glass slide. Check for the correct orientation of the pigmented area. Let
 sections dry for 1 h at RT. Store cryosections at −80 °C until continuing the procedure, with a minimum of 2 h or long-term storage.
 PAUSE POINT Samples can be stored for up to 1 year at −80 °C.
 j


12 Before the immunostaining procedure, thaw the slides at RT and let them dry for 30 min.
 13 Wash slides twice for 3 min with PBS. You can use a Coplin jar for washing or simply add 200 µl PBS on the lying slide.
14 Incubate slides with 1% (wt/vol) sodium dodecyl sulfate in PBS for 5 min at RT.
15 Wash twice for 3 min with PBS.
16 Incubate with permeabilization solution for 10 min at RT.
17 Wash three time for 3 min with PBS-Glycine (0.225 g Glycine per 100 ml).
18 Incubate with blocking solution at RT for 1 h or at 4 °C overnight.
19 Dilute the primary antibodies in blocking solution (Table 3 or the manufacturer’s instructions). Note that nuclear staining in human organoids is
 challenging, and most of the retinal antibodies available are transcription factors, and thus are nuclear markers. Perform heat-induced antigen
 retrieval with sodium citrate buffer (10 mM sodium citrate, pH 6) and a microwave74. Phalloidin staining requires 1 hour of incubation at RT and
 light protection. No secondary antibody staining is necessary since phalloidin is conjugated with the ﬂuorophore (TRITC).
20 Add 100 µl of antibody dilution onto each slide and cover slide with Paraﬁlm (cut into slide format). Incubate at RT for a minimum of 2 h or at
 4 °C overnight.
21 Collect the primary antibody solution. Primary antibody dilutions can be stored at 4 °C and reused up to three times within 3 months.
22 Wash three times for 5 min with blocking solution.
23 Add the corresponding secondary antibody solution mixed with DAPI (dilution for both is 1:500 in blocking solution) and incubate for 1–2 h at
 RT or overnight at 4 °C protected from light.
 ! CAUTION Fluorophores of secondary antibodies are light sensitive and fade in daylight. Protect slides from this step onward from light.
24 Remove the secondary antibody solution.
25 Wash three times for 5 min with blocking solution.
26 Check brieﬂy under a microscope for nuclear staining (DAPI) and antibody signal.
27 (Optional) If co-staining, repeat steps 20–26 for the following primary/secondary antibody. For subsequent secondary antibody incubations, the
 addition of DAPI is not needed. Co-staining is highly recommended.
28 Perform a ﬁnal wash with distilled water and brieﬂy air-dry slides at RT for 10 min.
29 Add three drops of Mowiol onto the slide and place a glass coverslip (24 × 50 mm) onto the slide, carefully avoiding air bubbles.
30 Let the slide with Mowiol to dry for 1 h at RT, always protecting from light.
 31 Store slides for long-term storage at 4 °C in the dark until microscopic analysis, either with a wideﬁeld, or if accessable, preferably with a
 confocal microscope.


 are not directly differentiated from iPSCs but innately form from the forebrain-associated OVs.
 Alongside RPEs, OVB organoids offer various cell repositories of other retinal and non-retinal
 progenitors, including immature photoreceptors. Indeed, transplantation of these actively pro-
 liferative precursors might be more efﬁcient regarding engraftment and tissue repair than terminally
 differentiated cells. Meaning that after engraftment and a regeneration phase supported by the

NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1897

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 Box 3 | Preparation of OVB organoids for tracing experiment ● Timing ~ 2 d
 Procedure
 CRITICAL Perform all steps under a clean bench.
 c


 1 Clean the micromanipulator with 70% ethanol (eEtOH) and place it under the clean bench.
 2 Prepare ﬁne glass capillary pipettes (e.g., with DMZ Universal Electrode Puller). Check if the opening is still accessible by sucking and releasing
 DMEM/F12. Prepare at least four thin capillaries for each organoid since they break easily, and each dye requires a fresh, unused capillary.
 3 Prepare 1:1 (vol/vol) dilutions CTB-488 or CTB-647 in DMEM/F12 in sterile 1.5 ml microtubes and protect them from light.
 4 Place a 10 µl drop of Matrigel near an edge of a sterile glass slide and let the Matrigel solidify.
 5 Collect OVB organoids of day 60 and place them on the Matrigel drop on the sterile glass slide. Use a cut 1,000 µl micropipette tip for
 transferring organoids.
 6 Remove excess medium carefully. Leave a thin ﬁlm or small drop of liquid around the organoid to ensure it does not dry out.
 7 Place glass slide with organoids on the stage holder of a stereomicroscope under the clean bench.
 8 Move the microinjector close to the organoids on the microscope stage holder.
 9 Fill glass capillary tip with 3 µl of CTB-488 dilution (front ﬁll) and move the needle tip forward in front of the ﬁrst pigmented area. Inject the
 solution into the ﬁrst OV carefully, using a microscope. Try not to injure the OV or the surrounding tissue and avoid making air bubbles.
10 Move the microinjector tip backward and replace the tip with a new thin glass tip.
 CRITICAL STEP Add one drop of OVB medium on the organoid to prevent it from drying out.
 c


 11 Fill glass pipette tip with 3 µl of CTB-647 dilution and repeat step 8 with the second pigmented area.
12 Transfer the injected organoids into a well of a 24-well plate for suspension culture and expose the plate to normal room light for 10 min.
 13 After light exposure, culture the plate at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 24 h.
14 After 24 h incubation, collect CTB-injected OVB organoids in a sterile 1 ml tube. Use a cut 1,000 µl micropipette tip for transferring organoids.
15 Carefully remove any carried-over medium with a 200 µl micropipette tip without disturbing the organoids.
16 Wash organoids once with 1 ml of prewarmed DMEM/F12 for 3 min and remove the DMEM/F12.
 CRITICAL STEP Protect organoids from light in all of the following steps.
 c


17 Add 1 ml of 4% PFA, prewarmed in a 37 °C water bath, and incubate the tube at RT for 30–60 min.
 CRITICAL STEP Do not exceed the time of PFA ﬁxation above 1 h because this will lead to high autoﬂuorescence.
 c


18 Clear the tissue as described previously10. First, dehydrate the PFA-ﬁxed organoid sequentially in graded EtOH series of 30% (vol/vol) EtOH,
 50% (vol/vol) EtOH, 75% (vol/vol) EtOH and 100% (vol/vol) EtOH. For each step, gently shake organoids in a 1 ml tube for 30 min at 4 °C,
 always protected from light.
19 Clear the organoids with ethyl cinnamate (ECI) for 30 min at RT, protected from light. After successful clearing, organoids will display only the
 pigmented areas, and the brain part will be transparent.
 CRITICAL STEP Without tissue clearing, it is impossible to detect clear signals from the ﬂuorescent-tagged CTBs inside the organoid and get
 c


 satisfying 3D images.
20 Place organoid in ECI with a cut 1,000 µl micropipette tip into coverslip bottom µ-slides protected from light.
 PAUSE POINT Organoids can be stored in the ECI at 4 °C protected from light until 3D imaging. Do not exceed storing for more than
 j


 2 weeks including step 22.
21 Perform additional staining using the blue (405) or the red channel (594), e.g., for DAPI staining (405) and/or IF (594).
 PAUSE POINT Store CTB-injected, tissue cleared and stained organoids for no longer than 2 weeks in total at 4 °C protected from light,
 j


 since ﬂuorophore signals might fade after this time.
22 Perform 3D imaging of an OVB organoid using a confocal microscope. We use a Zeiss LSM 880 confocal microscope with EC Plan-Neoﬂuor
 10×/0.3 and Plan-Apochromat 20×/0.8 M27 objectives. Place organoid into the center of the µ-slide chamber and orient the OVB organoid so
 that the pigmented areas are facing to the side of the µ-slide chamber. Start following trajectories from OVs into the inside of the organoid.
23 Export raw ﬁles to software Imaris x64 version 7.7.1 to perform surface and volume rendering. For details, see the manufacturer´s instructions.
24 Process obtained ﬁles further using Image J, Adobe photoshop CC 2017, and Adobe Illustrator CC 2017.


 Box 4 | Isolation of RPEs from OVB organoids and culturing ● Timing ~2 weeks
 Procedure
 1 Collect three to ﬁve OVB organoids of day 60 in a sterile 15 ml centrifuge tube. Use a cut 1,000 µl micropipette tip for transferring organoids.
 2 Remove any of the carried-over medium carefully with a 200 µl micropipette tip without disturbing the organoids. Wash organoids once with 1 ml
 of DMEM/F12 (prewarmed to 37 °C in a water bath) for 3 min and withdraw the DMEM/F12.
 3 Dissociate the organoids to small aggregates by adding 3 ml of 0.05% Trypsin and incubating for 20 min at 37 °C.
 4 To stop the reaction, inhibit Trypsin by adding 6 ml of 20% FBS-DMEM.
 5 Collect darkly pigmented aggregates in a separate 15 ml centrifuge tube and centrifuge at 1,000g for 3 min at RT.
 6 Resuspend the pigmented aggregate pellet in RPE medium (Table 6) and seed them onto laminin-coated cell culture treated dishes.
 7 Incubate dishes at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in the incubator.
 8 Within the next 2 weeks, you can observe expanding colonies of pigmented cells growing as adherent monolayer sheets.
 9 To subculture the RPE cells and obtain a pure RPE culture, one can optionally pick pigmented colonies and transfer small aggregates to a new
 laminin-coated TC-treated dish.


 transplanted cells, these precursors can differentiate within their in vivo niche to terminally differ-
 entiated and fully functional cell types. Although untested, the qualities of these cells, hypothetically,
 maybe better than those derived from the directed differentiation of iPSCs in 2D. Thus, when
 generated in suitable conditions with strict good manufacturing standards, OVB organoids could be

1898 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 Box 5 | Preparation of OVB organoids for scRNA-seq ● Timing ~ 1 h
 Procedure
 1 Collect up to three OVB organoids from day 30 or day 60 in a sterile 15 ml centrifuge tube. Use a cut 1,000 µl micropipette tip for transferring
 organoids.
 2 Remove any carried-over medium carefully with a 200 µl micropipette tip without disturbing the organoids.
 3 Wash organoids three times with 3 ml of PBS and withdraw the PBS.
 4 Add 2 ml of Accutase containing 0.2 U/µl DNase I (prewarmed in a 37 °C water bath), close the tube tightly and incubate at 37 °C in a
 water bath.
 CRITICAL STEP Dissociation of organoids to single cells causes cell stress and cell death. It is possible to add Rock inhibitor into the Accutase
 c


 + DNase I solution during the incubation. However, if you are interested in cell death, cell survival, apoptosis, etc., in your scRNA-seq analysis,
 Rock inhibitor treatment will interfere with the naturally occurring apoptosis pathways and lead to compound-induced aberrant signaling.
 5 Check after 15 min for dissociation of organoids by shaking the tube and watching the integrity of organoids. Place the tube under a sterile hood
 and dissociate organoids by pipetting up and down with an uncut 1,000 µl micropipette tip.
 6 Place the tube back into a water bath and incubate for another 15 min at 37 °C.
 7 Repeat step 5.
 8 Place tube back and incubate for another 15 min at 37 °C. Do not exceed 45 min of Accutase treatment in total, since this would lead to too high
 a portion of dead cells and might decrease the success of the further procedure.
 ? TROUBLESHOOTING
 9 Stop Accutase treatment by adding 8 ml DMEM/F12, prewarmed in a 37 °C waterbath.
 10 Filter the suspension through a sterile 70 µm diameter strainer to remove not dissociated connective tissue and create a purely single-cell
 suspension.
 11 Centrifuge cells at 500g for 5 min at RT.
 12 Aspirate medium and resuspend the cell pellet in 1ml of OVB organoid medium and count the cells. Perform Trypan-blue staining. It is
 recommended to obtain 65–95% cell viability to continue with the procedure.
 13 For scRNA library construction, you one can use, for example, Chromium Single Cell 3′ Reagent Kits v3. Follow the manufacturer´s instructions
 and target 2,000–3,000 cells per sample.
 14 Make a primer mixture Using primers containing an Ilumina R1 sequence (read 1 sequencing primer), a 16 bp 10× barcode, a 12 bp unique
 molecular identiﬁer and a poly-dT primer sequence.
 15 Mix primer mixture with cell lysate and master mix.
 16 Incubate the gel beads-in-emulsion (GEM’s (chips)) to produce barcoded, full-length complementary DNA (cDNA) from the originally poly-
 adenylated messenger RNA (mRNA). After the incubation, break the chips and recover the pooled cDNAs.
 17 Clean up the cDNAs from leftover biochemical and primers with the help of silane magnetic beads.
 18 Amplify the full-length barcoded cDNA by PCR for the library construction. For more details refer to the supporting work5.


 Box 6 | Preparation of OVB organoids for bulk RNA-seq ● Timing ~6 h
 Procedure
 1 Collect up to three OVB organoids of the same batch in a sterile Rnase-free 1.5 ml tube. Use a cut 1,000 µl micropipette tip for transferring
 organoids.
 2 Remove any carried-over medium carefully with a 200 µl micropipette tip without disturbing the organoids.
 3 Wash organoids once with cold PBS and withdraw PBS.
 4 Add 300 µl Tri-Reagent and incubate at RT for 5 min.
 5 Vortex tube three times for 5 s.
 6 Incubate the tube at RT for 5 min without agitation.
 7 Vortex tube three times for 5 s.
 8 Keep the tube on ice for 10 min.
 9 Vortex tube three times for 5 s.
10 Keep the tube on ice for 10 min.
 11 Freeze organoids by a snap freeze on dry ice and store them at −80 °C overnight.
 PAUSE POINT Store organoids in Tri-Reagent at −80 °C for up to 6 months.
 j


12 Thaw organoids in Tri-reagent at RT.
 13 Vortex the tube times for 5 s.
14 Pipette remaining cell clumps up and down for complete dissociation with 200 µl micropipette tips (ﬁltered, Rnase-free tip).
15 Perform phenol/chloroform extraction to separate nucleic acids from lipids and proteins. Extract RNA with a commercially available RNA
 extraction kit.
16 Use 2 µg of total RNA to subselect poly(A)+ transcripts and generate strand-speciﬁc cDNA libraries.
17 Sequence libraries to ~50 million read pairs each (75 bp reads) on a HiSeq4000 platform (Illumina).
18 Assess data sequencing quality with FastQC and map paired-end sequencing reads with STAR aligner75 to Hg19 human reference assembly and
 quantiﬁed with featureCounts76.
19 Normalize raw read counts with the RUVSeq77 package in R to remove unwanted variation based on replicate samples (RUVs).
20 Analyze changes in differential gene expression (DGE) with the DESeq2 (ref. 78) package. The list of 3,923 signiﬁcantly DGE genes (log2FC ±1.5
 and padj ≤0.05 cutoff) is subjected to afﬁnity propagation clustering based on similarity matrix, with the APcluster package79.
21 Generate a dendrogram with clusters, cutoff and superclusters, and use these for Gene Ontology term search analysis with clusterProﬁler.
 Classify signiﬁcant DGE genes in superclusters and subject them to gene set enrichment analysis with gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
 (ref. 8; v3.0) using C5 collection of Gene Ontology gene sets from the Molecular Signatures Database80.


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1899

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 Box 7 | Preparation of OVB organoids for TEM ● Timing ~5 d
 Additional reagents
 ● Glutaraldehyde solution (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. G5882)

 ! CAUTION This substance is acutely toxic by inhalation or oral uptake, causes eye damage, respiratory sensitivity and skin sensititvity. Main
 target organ is the respiratory system. It is hazardous for aquatic systems. Use faceshield, gloves and eye protection, and handle under the fume
 hood. Dispose of it in hazardous waste only.
 ● Osmium tetroxide solution (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 75633-2ML; CAS no. 20816-12-0)

 ! CAUTION Acutely toxic by oral uptake or inhalation. Can cause eye damage and skin irritation. It is a very toxic hazardous material, thus use
 faceshields, gloves, eye protection and fume hood when handling.
 ● Propylene oxide (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 1576945; CAS no. 75-56-9)

 ! CAUTION Flammable, acutely toxic by oral uptake or inhalation or skin exposure, and causes eye irritation. This substance is a germ cell
 mutagen and carcinogen. Kepp away from hot surfaces, and wear protective gloves, clothing, eye protection and face protection.
 ● Epoxy systems Araldit G 2 cast resin (Carl Roth, 2545.1)

 ! CAUTION Can cause damage to health, very toxic, can cause irritation to eyes, skin or respiratory organs, Use fume hood, hand and eye
 protection. Resin is harmful to aquatic organisms; dispose in hazardous waste only.

 Procedure
 1 Fix the required number of OVB organoids by immersing them in 3–4 ml of 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 1.8% sucrose in PBS (pH 7.2), overnight at 4 °C
 CRITICAL STEP Ensure pH is adjusted to 7.2 to diminish ﬁxation artifacts.
 c


 2 Rinse the samples ﬁve times in 5 ml of PBS (15 min each).
 CRITICAL STEP This washing step is critical to remove all traces of ﬁxative, as glutaraldehyde and osmium tetroxide (to be used in the next
 c


 step) form an intermediate compound that can break down to osmium black, a precipitate that can compromise the quality of the sample.
 3 Wash the samples twice in distilled water and post-ﬁx in 1% aqueous solution of osmium tetroxide for 1–2 h at 4 °C.
 CRITICAL STEP Avoid longer exposures to osmium tetroxide as this may extract cytoplasmic components.
 c


 4 Dehydrate the OVB organoids in a graded series of EtOH (50%, 75%, 95% and absolute), incubating them two times, 15 min each.
 5 After dehydration, incubate the samples for 15 min in 5 ml of the intermediate solvent propylene oxide since EtOH and the embedding medium
 are not fully miscible.
 6 First, incubate the organoids in 5 ml of a mixture of propylene oxide and embedding resin (Epon-Araldite) (propylene oxide 2:1 resin) for
 30 min at RT.
 7 Agitate the samples very slowly on a wheel rotator and then put overnight at 4 °C in 5 ml of a mixture of propylene oxide and resin 1:1.
 8 Transfer the samples in a pure embedding resin overnight at 4 °C.
 9 Transfer the organoids to ﬂat embedding molds from the embedding medium and properly orient to maximize cutting the desired area.
 10 Leave to polymerize for 48 h at 60–62 °C, and then cut the block with a razor blade to remove the resin around the sample and create a small
 trapezoidal block.
 11 Perform ultrathin sections of uniform thickness of 400–500 nm using a Reichert ultramicrotome and collect the sections on a single hole
 formvar-coated copper grids for observing serial sections.
 12 To counter stain the sections, transfer the grids into a 2% (wt/vol) uranyl acetate drop in a 70% methanol solution for 7 min or 2% uranyl
 acetate in distilled water for 20 min. However, methanol has been shown to enhance the contrast given by uranyl acetate.
 13 Wash the grids in four drops of 70% methanol followed by ﬁve drops of distilled water.
 14 Transfer the grids to a drop of Reynold’s lead citrate for 2–3 min.
 15 Wash the grids in ﬁve drops of distilled water and dry at RT.
 16 One can perform observations on aTEM. In our case, we used a Tecnai G2 Spirit EM (FEI) equipped with a Morada CCD camera (Olympus).


 utilized to harvest cells or cell complexes for autologous transplantation and cell replacement therapy,
 if cultured under clinical-grade standards and tested for safety regarding tumorigenesis and
 immunity.

 Comparison with other methods
 In contrast to previous protocols that generated either 3D brain organoids or retinal organoids, our
 protocol allows generating both domains within a single organoid. Although some brain organoid
 culturing methods have allowed pigmented areas to form, these mainly were randomly placed or
 scattered across brain organoid surfaces9. This ﬁnding has contributed to the assumption that brain
 organoids are chaotic tissues lacking the self-patterning rules that in vivo systems have43. On
 the other hand, pure retinal organoids assemble pigment-rich OV-like structures protruding from the
 primary tissue. These structures are excised and cultured under a deﬁned condition for several weeks.
 Remarkably, these organoids lack forebrain tissues and do not form in vivo-like OVs, layered RPEs or
 properly positioned photoreceptors16. Thus, so far, no brain organoid culturing method has been
 described to develop bilaterally symmetric optical vesicles or cups. Table 1 compares several different
 methods for generating human optic cup and vesicle-like structures in 3D (including various retinal
 organoids and OVB organoids), detailing which kind of assays/experiments have been used to test
 their characteristics, while Table 2 compares OVB organoids with some of the selected aspects of the
 retinal organoids.
 Below, we summarize the pros and cons of OVB organoids compared with other methods for
 generating organoids containing retina-like structures.

1900 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 Box 8 | Preparation of OVB organoids for ERGs ● Timing 2 d
 Procedure
 1 Transfer 60-d-old organoids each to one well of a suspension culture 12-well plate. Add 2 ml of OVB-organoid medium per well.
 2 Keep the plate in absolute darkness at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 24 h before ERG experiments.
 3 On the day of the ERG experiment, prepare fresh OVB organoid medium in 50 ml centrifuge tubes. Oxygenate the OVB organoid medium by
 pumping air onto the bottom of the centrifuge tube with a sterile 10 ml serological pipette for 2 min under the clean bench.
 4 Keep the room where you handle OVB organoids and perform the ERG experiment absolutely dark. Use a red light (e.g., from the western blot
 developing room) as the sole light source. If required, use an opaque box to transport OVB organoids from one dark room to another.
 5 Set up the ERG aperture and ﬁll the superfusion system with an oxygenated OVB medium81.
 6 Place organoids under red light in an electrode chamber.
 7 Place electrode chamber into the dark chamber of the ERG aperture and connect it to the superfusion system containing oxygenated OVB
 medium.
 8 Set up the speed of superfusion to 0.5 ml/min.
 Dose-dependent light sensitivity
 9 For dose-dependent light sensitivity, expose each organoid to 500 ms long ﬂashes. Start with a low intensity of 2,000 mlux (moonlight on a
 clear night), increase to 20,000 mlux (candle light) and then to 200,000 mlux (daylight on a cloudy day). Repeat each intensity three times at
 3 min intervals, and then switch to the next higher light intensity. Record all responses.
 Photic stress experiment
 10 If OVB organoids show dose-dependent responses to different light stimulation, you can continue with the photic stress experiment. Keep the
 superfusion speed at 0.5 ml/min. Continue immediately after Step 9 with the same organoids. Alternatively, start with new organoids and
 adjust the system by exposing the organoids to 500 ms ﬂashes of 200,000 mlux every 3 min for 15 min (‘pre-bright’ light) until you get a stably
 repeated light response.
 11 Desensitize the organoid in the electrode chamber by bright light exposure with a light intensity of 4,600 lux for 10 min continuously. A 150 W
 white light bulb could be used as a bright light source.
 12 Place an infrared ﬁlter between the bulb and electrode chamber to subtract the thermal impact of the bright light source.
 13 Let the organoids regenerate for 30 s in a dark chamber without light exposure after the 10 min of bright light in Step 11.
 14 Start light ﬂashes of 500 ms and 200,000 mlux every 3 min and record the responses.
 15 After 30 min of ﬂashing and recording, using the same organoids under the same conditions to repeat Step 11, but do not use bright light
 exposure, instead replacing it with 0 mlux (darkness). This can be used as a negative control for the bright light exposure procedure.
 Isolation of A-wave
 16 Set up the superfusion system containing the OVB organoid medium to a higher speed of 2 ml/min.
 17 Let organoids adjust for 36 min of equilibration time to this higher superfusion speed until they show a stable electrical signal of −200 mV as a
 response to ﬂashes of 200,000 mlux and 500 ms. Record the electric response continuously every 3 min.
 18 Add 10 mM aspartate to the medium after equilibration time is completed. Record electric response continuously. Aspartate will block the
 signal transduction from photoreceptors to the subsequent retinal cell layers (‘A-wave’).
 19 Wash out aspartate by adding OVB organoid medium without aspartate into the system. Continuously record the electric signals as responses
 to light ﬂashes.


 Pros:
 ● A shorter duration of 50–60 d compared with the majority of other protocols, which is more


 comparable to in vivo development of human embryos and makes it more feasible to conduct
 experiments in a short period
 ● A robust method to reproducibly generate brain organoids with a forebrain entity to model brain


 development and disorders from a wide variety of iPSC donors (‘Anticipated results’ section)
 ● Closer to an in vivo-like organization

 ● Easy handling protocol (no cutting, only four-stage protocol)

 ● Easy quality control check for the occurrence of dark dots/RPE

 ● Two distinct organ types (brain and eye primordium) in a single organoid

 ● Layered RPE cells

 ● Immature photoreceptors capped by RPE cells

 ● Possibility to isolate RPEs and other cell types of interest and reculture them in 2D

 ●
 Generates wide cell diversity of neuronal and non-neuronal cell types (cornea, lens, microglia)
 ●
 OVB organoids harbor the pigmented areas at one pole. This and transcriptomics also underline the
 ability of patterning and organized self-assembly of the OVB organoids
 ● Immature photoreceptors are capped by RPE and do not outwardly project, which is a unique feature


 of these OVB organoids
 ● Functionality regarding light response


 Cons:
 ● The immature retina as compared with retinal organoids

 ● Inability to generate mature photoreceptors within this culturing period of 60 d

 ● Low coverage rate for single-cell RNA (scRNA) sequencing analysis of optic cell types due to a wide


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1901

1902
 PROTOCOL


 Table 1 | Comparison of methods

 Organoid type Duration No. of Functional assays Transcriptomics Morphology Cell line(s) Functional Ref.
 protocol stages integration

 63
 Eye cup >260 d 3a No No Stratiﬁed retina 1 mESC line, No
 1 hESC line
 15
 3D retinal tissues >150 d 4a Patch clamp recording No Stratiﬁed retina 3 hiPSC lines No
 64
 Optic cups 147 d 4a No No Stratiﬁed retina 3 hiPSC lines No
 65
 Mini-corneal organoids 105 d 4a No No Retinal primordium, 1 hESC line, No
 cornea, lens 1 hiPSC line
 66
 Cornea organoids >120 d 5a No No Eye ﬁeld and cornea 1 hiPSC line No
 9
 Brain organoid with 270 d 5 Extracellular recordings scRNA-seq No stratiﬁcation shown 1 hiPSC line No
 photosensitive cells
 67
 Retinal organoids 150 d 4 Multi-electrode No Stratiﬁed retina 8 hiPSC lines No
 recording
 16
 Retinal organoids >175 d 5 No No Stratiﬁed retina 12 hiPSC lines, No
 4 hESC lines
 68
 Cone-rich retinal organoids 215 d 5 Patch-clamp recording Bulk and scRNA-seq Stratiﬁed retina 1 hESC line, No
 1 hiPSC line
 69
 Retinal organoids >120 d 5 No No Stratiﬁed retina hESC line, No
 1 hiPSC line
 70
 Retinal organoids 150 d >5 No No Stratiﬁed retina hESC line No
 71,72
 Retinal organoids 280 d 2 Calcium imaging No Stratiﬁed retina and mature 3 hiPSC lines No
 photoreceptors
 Brain organoids with 50–60 d 3 Patch clamp recording RNA-seq from single Stratiﬁed retina, cornea, lens, 5 hiPSC lines Yes Current
 bilaterally symmetric OVs and ERGs organoids optic tract work5
 Comparison of relevant methods generating human optic cup/vesicle-like structures in 3D and testing their characteristics. This table is partially reproduced from our original work5. aIncludes manual excision of retinal or corneal structures and further culturing of
 excised tissue. mESC, mouse embryonic stem cells; hESC, human embryonic stem cells; hiPSC, human iPSC.
 NATURE PROTOCOLS


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 Table 2 | Comparison of some of the aspects between OVB organoids and retinal organoids

 Aspect OVB organoids Other retinal organoids

 Maturity level Immature Mature
 Duration of protocol 50–60 d ≥120 d
 Interorgan studies Yes No
 Neuronal and non-neuronal Yes No
 cell types
 In vivo-like patterning/polarity Yes No
 Grade of in vivo similaritya High Low
 Functionality in ERGs Yes No or not tested
 Protocol steps 3 3–5
 Quality check Pigmented areas visible by Fixation, staining or genetic engineering for
 eye or magniﬁer live monitoring by microscopy
 Diversity of cell types High Low
 Validation of successful Possible after 30 d Much later
 differentiation
 Comparison based on retinal organoids from refs. 15,16,67,69–72. aGrade of in vivo similarity: here we considered the parameters such as time of development in vivo and culturing/differentiation time
 in vitro, gene expression, morphology, structure, patterning and functionality.


 variety of cell types in low quantity (retinal/lens/cornea cell types) and high abundance of the brain
 tissue part
 ● Validation of successful differentiation is only possible after 30 d of culture

 ● Culturing OVB organoids beyond 60 d leads to the degradation and collapse of organoids

 ● Unique expertise for human iPS cell cultivation and differentiation is necessary

 ● Culturing optimization may be required due to the erratic behavior of iPSCs donors


 Experimental design
 In all cases, it is necessary to check each iPSC line for the capacity to differentiate into all three
 germ layers (ecto-, meso- and endoderm) by the standard differentiation protocol with traditional
 markers, and to check that cells are free from contaminants. It is noteworthy that even if an iPSC
 line generates neural progenitor cells4,6,32 (as veriﬁed by the expression of Nestin, for example), it
 does not guarantee that the same cell line could generate all other mature cell types of the neuronal
 lineages such as photoreceptors or RPE cells. Testing the standard three germ layers indicates that
 the iPSC line is pluripotent and can form the progenitor cells of each germ layer. This could be a
 likely scenario if one uses a transgenic iPSC line reprogrammed by a lentiviral-based system.
 Lentiviral transduction can introduce transgenes at multiple random sites into the genome. By
 chance, a transgene could be inserted into a coding sequence or a regulatory element critical for
 RPE cells’ development or function. Thus, it is advisable to consider the possibility of random
 integration.

 Designing strategies
 Before the researcher starts designing the experiments, certain aspects have to be taken into
 consideration:
 1 For modeling genetic diseases such as retinitis pigmentosa, macular degeneration, oculocutaneous
 albinism, and so on, it is necessary to access patient-derived iPSC lines from stem cell biobanks or
 to reprogram patient materials in the laboratory. If no patient iPSCs are available, the disease-
 causing mutation can be introduced in isogenic iPSCs by genetic engineering methods such as
 clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats and associated protein 9 (CRISPR–Cas9)
 technology.
 2 For developmental studies and live imaging, transgenic iPSC lines with ﬂuorescent reporters, for
 example, under a tissue-speciﬁc promoter such as retinal progenitors or eye ﬁeld, can be used.
 3 For cell lineage tracing during development, barcoding methods for cells have been described44.
 Before starting the differentiation, this has to be done on the iPSC level in advance.


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1903

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 Control cell lines
 1 As a control line for patient iPSCs, using iPSCs from at least two different healthy donors of the
 same gender, cell origin and age group is recommended.
 2 For the CRISPR–Cas9-engineered iPSCs, use the parental cell line used for the CRISPR–Cas9
 (‘isogenic control’).
 3 For the ectopic expression of a mutant transgene, use the original cell line expressing the wild-type
 gene as a control.

 Possible variations in the cell line
 We have generated OVB organoids from ﬁve human iPS cell lines, and the percentage of organoids
 containing one or two pigmented areas changes signiﬁcantly among the different cell lines
 (‘Anticipated results’).
 Several studies report that the cell type from which your selected iPSCs originate might inﬂuence
 the differentiation efﬁciency45,46. We have experienced this ‘somatic memory effect’ when using the
 CRX-iPSC that were reprogrammed from Müller ganglion cells, for which we observed an earlier RPE
 cell occurrence than other lines.

 Protocol modiﬁcations
 The protocol we describe here not only allows the study of OV development but can also be utilized
 for studying forebrain development, axis formation, cyclopia, ganglionic eminence, optic stalk or
 optic tract development. However, this protocol could be modiﬁed to obtain organoids emphasizing
 these structures. For example, adding media supplements that support neuronal maturation and
 function (brain-derived neurotrophic factor, glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor, BrainPhys
 medium47) to the OVB medium could improve the neuronal activity in the OVB organoids. Notably,
 continued organoid growth beyond 60 d with other neuron-supporting media or inducing vascu-
 latures could enhance the neuronal circuitry and further development of the RGCs, optic tract, LGN
 and visual cortex area.

 Statistical requirements
 In all cases, we recommend setting up at least three independent experiments (N = 3 batches) of
 organoid cultures to accomplish statistically meaningful results. For a single batch (N = 1), start from
 the thawing of the iPSC line and proceed with differentiation until the required day of OVB organoid
 protocol. Repeat this procedure twice for batches two and three (N = 3). In each batch, at least three
 individual organoids (n = 3; technical replicates) per timepoint, treatment or condition must be
 analyzed to get statistically meaningful results. For example, to perform four different analyses such
 as IF, western blot, ERGs, and quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction
 (qRT–PCR), one should use n = 12 organoids for each test method (n = 12; 3× IF, 3× western blot,
 3× ERGs and 3× qRT–PCR). The exact number of replicates should be used for respective control
 experiments.

 Limitations
 This protocol produces organoids within 50–60 d, which comprise a wide diversity of immature
 neuronal, non-neuronal and retinal cell types, matching Capowski stage 2–3 (ref. 16). However, as the
 protocol described here consumes ~50–60 d across multiple stages, it is prone to the accumulation of
 mistakes. These can further be magniﬁed, eventually leading to an unsuccessful generation of OVB
 organoids. Although we provide a step-by-step protocol, the problems and troubleshooting can be
 frustratingly delayed due to the different steps involved. Furthermore, having tested the method’s
 robustness with ﬁve different iPSC donors, we expect success rates to vary signiﬁcantly among the
 donor lines.
 Even though the described protocol allows the generation of OVB organoids exhibiting a wide
 diversity of various neuronal, non-neuronal and retinal cell types, the nature of cell types is mostly
 immature and matched to Capowski stages 2–3 (ref. 16). This could be because the viability of
 organoids is limited beyond day 60. This poor viability is one of the important limitations, as it does
 not favor the maturation of the cells. As a result, the OVB organoids, at this stage of development, do
 not show mature retinal cell types and retina–cortex connectivity as seen in vivo. We still need to
 attempt to optimize the conditions that allow the generation of healthy organoids beyond 60 d of
 culture. However, the increased accessibility of this protocol may enable researchers to accelerate the

1904 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 further development of strategies that can allow culturing them for a longer time. Another limitation
 in this methodology is its scalability to generate many organoids per batch. As most steps strictly
 require manual processing and culturing, there is a limitation on how many organoids one can
 generate per batch. Generation of ~40 OVB organoids per batch is realistic, and this is a sufﬁcient
 number for the analysis of three different timepoints, for example.
 OVB organoids generated with this protocol consistently developed OVs across iPSCs from several
 donors (‘Anticipated results’). We hope further optimizations and ﬁne tuning by a wide range
 of researchers can improve the proposed protocol’s robustness. Finally, due to a substantial portion of
 the brain tissue, the number of retinal and non-neuronal cell types covered for bulk or scRNA
 sequencing (scRNA-seq) is often limited. This poses a risk of using many organoids for sequencing
 purposes, which is not cost-effective. Otherwise, the results of correlating OVB organoids with
 the in vivo counterparts are not satisfactory. However, despite these limitations, we believe that the
 accessibility of the current protocol will develop measures to overcome the limitations described here.

Materials
 Biological materials
 Cell lines
 ●
 High-quality human iPSCs. We have successfully generated OVB organoids using a variety of genetic
 backgrounds of iPSC origin. In total, we used ﬁve donors (extended details of the cell lines and
 respective publications are given in the key resource table of the main supporting paper5):
 ● IMR90-1 was purchased from WiCell Research Institute, USA; RRID: CVCL_C434

 ● Crx-iPS was obtained from the laboratory of Olivier Goureau
 48

 ● F13535.1 was obtained from and generated by the Celeste Karch laboratory
 49

 ● GM25256 was purchased from Allen Cell Collection at Coriell Institute for Medical Research, USA;


 RRID: CVCL_Y803
 ● F14536.2 was obtained from and generated by the Celeste Karch laboratory
 49
 ! CAUTION The use of
 human tissues and human stem cells must adhere to institutional and funding body regulations, as well
 as to relevant ethical guidelines. Patient consent must be obtained before acquiring and working with
 any patient-derived cells. ! CAUTION Human cell work was conducted under the approval by the
 Washington University School of Medicine and the University of California San Francisco Institutional
 Review Board and Ethics Committee (IRB 201104178, 201306108 and 10-03946) regarding lines
 F13535.1 and F14536.2; Crx-iPS in accordance with the French bioethics law. The cell lines IMR90-1
 and GM25256 are freely and publicly available at WiCell or Coriell, respectively. ! CAUTION The cell
 lines used in experiments should be checked regularly to ensure that they are free from mycoplasma
 and other microbial contamination. CRITICAL It is critical to use high-quality iPSC cultures for this
 c


 protocol. This can substantially affect the differentiation procedure. For example, suppose your iPSC
 culture does not display a typical morphology of homogeneous stem cell colonies but instead contains
 large, ﬂat cells or cells with neurites. In that case, this is a sign of differentiation under stem cell
 conditions. For ‘cleaning up’ in cases where there are up to 20% of differentiated cell areas, remove any
 differentiated cells from the dishes before passaging. If more than 20% of the cells are differentiated, we
 recommend manually picking the ‘good’ iPSC colonies and transferring them to new dishes.

 Reagents
 Stem cell culture, medium, differentiation factors and reagents CRITICAL We have listed the
 c


 components used in the main supporting paper5. We recommend that the exact components be used
 from the suppliers listed below. Some substitutions from other suppliers could work as well. However,
 we have only validated that the listed components from the speciﬁed suppliers are compatible with this
 differentiation protocol.
 ● mTeSR1 complete kit (Stemcell Technologies, cat. no. 05850); alternatively, mTeSR plus (Stemcell


 Technologies, cat. no. 100-0276)
 ● Rock inhibitor (Y-27632 2HCl) (Selleckchem, cat. no. S1049) ! CAUTION Toxic, contains a
 pharmaceutically active ingredient. Therefore, avoid the aerosol formation and wear protective gloves
 and eye and face protection.
 ●
 Minimum Essential Medium (MEM; Thermo Scientiﬁc, 11140050)
 ● Fetal bovine serum (FBS), qualiﬁed, heat inactivated (Thermo Scientiﬁc, cat. no. 10500064) or


 alternatively FBS standard (PAN biotech, cat. no. P30-3306)
 ● Glutamax (Thermo Scientiﬁc, cat. no. 35050061)


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1905

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 ●
 Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium/F12 (DMEM/F12; Thermo Scientiﬁc, cat. no. 11320033)
 ● N2 supplement (Thermo Scientiﬁc, cat. no. 17502048)
 ● Neural basal medium (Thermo Scientiﬁc, cat. no. 21103049)

 ● Neural induction medium (NIM) (Stem Cell Technologies, cat. no. 21103049)

 ● Penicillin–streptomycin (Thermo Scientiﬁc, cat. no.15140122) ! CAUTION Can cause health hazards.
 Wear gloves/protective clothing/eye protection/face protection.
 ● Poly-L-lysine solution (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. P8920-100ML) ! CAUTION Can cause skin irritation,
 eye irritation, skin sensitization and long-term aquatic hazard. Avoid aerosol formation and release to
 the environment, wear protective gloves, eye protection and face protection.
 ● ReLeSR (Stem Cell Technologies, cat. no. 5872)

 ● Trypsin, 0.05% (Thermo Scientiﬁc cat. no. 25300054)

 ●
 β-Mercaptoethanol (Thermo Scientiﬁc cat. no. 31350010) ! CAUTION May cause an allergic skin
 reaction. Wear protective gloves and eye and face protection.
 ● Laminin, (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. L2020)

 ● Low-melt agarose (Thermo Scientiﬁc, cat. no. 17856)

 ● Matrigel hESC-qualiﬁed matrix (Corning, cat. no. 354277)

 ● Accutase solution (Sigma-Aldrich cat. no. A6964)

 ● DNase I (Roche, cat. no. 04536282001)

 ● Ames’ medium (Sigma-Aldrich cat. no. A1420)

 ● B-27 supplement (Thermo Scientiﬁc cat. no. 17504044)

 ● B-27 supplement w/o vitamin A (Thermo Scientiﬁc cat. no. 12587010)

 ● SB431542 (Selleckchem, cat. no. S1067) ! CAUTION Toxic and contains a pharmaceutically active
 ingredient. Avoid aerosol formation and wear protective gloves and eye and face protection.
 ●
 Insulin (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. I3536 or alternatively as solution cat. no. I9278)
 ● Dorsomorphin (Sigma-Aldrich cat. no. P5499)

 ● Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), sterile-ﬁltered, suitable for cell culture (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no.C6295)

 ● AlexaFluor488 and 647-cholera toxin b-subunit (CTB) (Invitrogen, cat. no. C34775 and C34778)

 ● Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (PBS tablets; Life technologies; cat. no. 18912014); one tablet in 500 ml


 distilled water, autoclaved before use). Unopened, autoclaved PBS can be stored up to 1 year at room
 temperature (RT; 20–22 °C).
 ● Tri-Reagent solution (Invitrogen, cat. no. AM9738) ! CAUTION Acute toxicicity by oral uptake or
 inhalation and skin exposure can cause skin erosion and severe eye damage. It has germ-cell
 mutagenicity and is suspected of causing genetic defects. The speciﬁc organs targeted upon repeated
 exposure are the nervous system, kidney, liver and skin. Wear protective clothing such as a laboratory
 coat, gloves and eye protection, and use Tri-Reagent only under the fume hood. Causes aquatic hazard,
 do discard it as hazardous waste and avoid releasing it to the environment.


 Antibodies
 ● Antibodies that can be used for immunostaining experiments, as described previously in the main
 supporting paper5 are listed in Table 3


 Fixation and immunostaining buffer
 ● Paraformaldehyde (PFA, Merck Millipore, CAS# 30525-89-4, cat. no.104005) ! CAUTION PFA is
 inﬂammable and acutely toxic upon oral uptake or inhalation. It causes skin irritation, severe eye
 damage and skin sensitivity. It is germline mutagenic and carcinogenic. Use chemical gloves, protective
 clothes, and eye and face protection. Handle PFA powder only under a fume hood.
 ● Methanol (ROTIPURAN ≥99.9 %, Carl Roth, 4627.5) ! CAUTION Methanol is inﬂammable, and direct


 contact leads to immediate damage to health or accident. It has allergenic, carcinogenic, mutagenic and
 reprotoxic effects. Wear gloves and eye protection and a mask or breathing protection.
 ● Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich, CAS no. 9036-19-5, cat. no. X100) ! CAUTION Triton X-100 damages
 metals and burns body tissues, may cause severe eye damage, causes health damage, eye, skin and/or
 respiratory organs irritation, is harmful to aquatic organisms and is toxic. Avoid aerosol formation and
 release to the environment, wear protective gloves, eye protection, and face protection.
 ● Fish gelatin (gelatin from cold water ﬁsh skin; Sigma-Aldrich, G7041)

 ● Toluidine blue (CAS no. 6586-04-5; Sigma-Aldrich 89640)

 ● Mowiol (Carl Roth, cat. no. 0713)


1906 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

Table 3 | Antibodies

 Name Source Cat. no. RRID Species Dilution

 Alpha A/alpha B Crystallin Enzo Life Sciences ADI-SPA-224-D RRID: AB_2039023 Rabbit 1:50
 Anti-CRX R&D Systems AF7085 RRID: AB_10993572 Sheep 1:100
 Anti-Ctip2 (25B6) Abcam ab18465 RRID: AB_2064130 Rat 1:500
 Anti-Doublecortin (DCX) Synaptic Systems 326 003 RRID: AB_2620067 Rabbit 1:400
 Anti-FoxG1 Abcam ab18259 RRID: AB_732415 Rabbit 1:400
 Anti-Keratin K3/K76 (clone AE5) Millipore CBL218 RRID: AB_93425 Rabbit 1:1,000
 NATURE PROTOCOLS


 Arl13B Proteintech 17711-1-AP RRID: AB_2060867 Rabbit 1:200
 Nanog DSHB CPTC-NANOG-1 RRID: AB_2888959 Rabbit 1:200
 Brn-3 (A-4) Santa Cruz sc-390780 — Mouse 1:50
 NRL R&D Systems AF2945 RRID: AB_2155098 Goat 1:200
 NRL Proteintech 17388-1-AP RRID: AB_2878400 Rabbit 1:200
 Myelin Basic Protein (D8X4Q) Cell Signaling 78896 RRID: AB_2799920 Rabbit 1:50
 Nestin (4D11) Novus Biologicals NBP1-92717 RRID: AB_11020601 Mouse 1:400
 OCT4 DSHB PCRP-POU5F1-1A4 RRID: AB_2618967 Mouse 1:50
 OTX2 GeneTex GTX133210 RRID: AB_2886868 Rabbit 1:200


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot
 OTX2 R&D Systems AF1979 RRID: AB_2157172 Goat 1:200
 ONECUT2 R&D Systems AF6294 RRID: AB_10640365 Sheep 1:200
 PAX6 DSHB pax6 RRID: AB_528427 Mouse 1:50
 PCP4 Proteintech 14705-1-AP RRID: AB_2878075 Rabbit 1:200
 Phalloidin-TRITC Sigma Aldrich P1951 RRID: AB_2315148 — 0.1 µg/ml
 PHF-1 Gift from Peter Davis Tau phos Ser396/Ser404 — Mouse 1:200
 Rax Abcam ab23340 RRID: AB_447379 Rabbit 1:50
 Recoverin Millipore AB5585 RRID: AB_2253622 Rabbit 1:1,000
 SSEA4 DSHB MC-813-70 (SSEA-4) RRID: AB_528477 Mouse 1:50
 Synapsin-1 Cell Signaling 5297 RRID: AB_2616578 Rabbit 1:200
 TRA-1-60 Antibody (41-1000) ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc 41-1000 RRID: AB_2533494 Mouse 1:100
 TRA-1-81 Antibody (TRA-1-81) ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc MA1-024 RRID: AB_2536706 Mouse 1:100
 VSX2 Santa Cruz sc-365519 RRID: AB_10842442 Goat 1:50
 VSX2 Santa Cruz sc-21692 RRID: AB_2216003 Mouse 1:50
 VSX2 Proteintech 25825-1-AP RRID: AB_2880257 Rabbit 1:50
 Alexa Fluor 488 -Donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) Life Technologies A-21206 RRID: AB_2535792 Donkey anti-rabbit 1:800
 Alexa Fluor 488 – goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) Life Technologies A28175 RRID: AB_2536161 Goat anti-mouse 1:800
 Alexa Fluor 594 -Donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) Life Technologies A-21207 RRID: AB_141637 Donkey anti-rabbit 1:800
 Alexa Fluor 594 – goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) Life Technologies A-11032 RRID: AB_2534091 Goat anti-mouse 1:800
 Alexa Fluor 647 -Donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) Life Technologies A-31573 RRID: AB_2536183 Donkey anti-rabbit 1:800
 Alexa Fluor 647 – goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) Life Technologies A-21236 RRID: AB_2535805 Goat anti-mouse 1:800
 Alexa Fluor 647 – donkey anti-Sheep IgG (H+L) Life Technologies A-21448 RRID: AB_2535865 Donkey anti-sheep 1:800
 PROTOCOL


 Alexa Fluor 594 – donkey anti-Rat IgG (H+L) Life Technologies A-21209 RRID: AB_2535795 Donkey anti-rat 1:800


1907

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 ●
 Glycerine (Carl Roth, cat. no. 3783)
 ● 0.2 M Tris–HCl (pH 8.5, Carl Roth, cat. no. 9090)

 Equipment
 CRITICAL We have used the following equipment in our experiments that can be substituted with any


 c
 suitable replacements.

 General equipment
 ● Electronic pipetting aid (Accupetta, Ratiolab, cat. no. 3200300)
 ● Micropipettes (Gilson Pipetman P10G, 1–10 µl, cat. no. CF-0175; Gilson Pipetman P100G, 10–100 µl,
 cat. no. CF-0187; Gilson Pipetman P1000G, 100–1,000 µl, cat. no. CF-0199; Gilson Pipetman P2G,
 0.2–2 µl, cat. no. CF-0169; Gilson Pipetman P200G, 20–200 µl, cat. no. CF-0193)
 ●
 Freezer
 ●
 Refrigerator
 ● Manual (Neubauer chamber, Marienfeld, MARI0640130) or automatic cell-counting system

 ● Humidiﬁed cell culture incubator (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, cat. no. 51026406) set at a temperature of


 37 °C and 5% CO2
 ● Reciprocal shaker suitable for use in a cell culture incubator (Reciprocating shakers, Promax) or


 spinner ﬂasks equipped with magnetic stirring and control unit (Pfeiffer, cat. no. 183 001)
 ● 37 °C water bath (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, cat. no. TSGP10)

 ● Biosafety cabinet (Scanlaf Mars)

 ● Light/ﬂuorescence microscope (Nikon, Nikon eclipse Ts2 inverted light microscope)

 ● Confocal microscope (Leica SP8, inverted confocal microscope)

 ●
 Zeiss LSM 880 confocal microscope with EC Plan-Neoﬂaur 10×/0.3 and Plan-Apochromat 20×/0.8
 M27 objectives
 ● Centrifuges for use with plate holder and 15 ml or 50 ml conical tubes holder (Hermle Z446K)

 ● Centrifuge equipped with adaptor or holders to spin multiwell plates

 ● Manual Micromanipulator (Märzäuser, Wetzlar) in combination with a manual air pump or electric


 micropump (FemtoJet 4i, Eppendorf, cat. no. 5252000021)
 ● DMZ Universal Electrode Puller (Zeitz Instruments GmbH)

 ● Cryostat microtome (CM1900, Leica)


 Consumables
 ●
 Serological pipettes Sarstedt (2 ml, 5 ml, 10 ml, 25 ml; SARS86.1252.001; SARS86.1253.001;
 SARS86.1254.001; SARS86.1685.001; and 50 ml Greiner bio-one 612-1018)
 ● Glass aspirating pipettes 150 mm (DWK Life Sciences, 612-3813)

 ● Filtered pipette tips, sterile (Biozyme, Safeseal tips professional, 10 μl, 20 μl, 200 μl and 1,000 μl)

 ● 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes (BioExpress, cat. no. C-3262-1)

 ● 15 ml conical tubes (Greiner BioOne, VWR, 391-3450)

 ● 50 ml conical tubes (USA Scientiﬁc, cat. no. 5622-7261)

 ● 96-Well low-adherent v-bottom plates (Life Technologies, cat. no. 277143)

 ● SUPERFROST Glass slides (VWR, cat. no. 48300-026)

 ● 60 mm tissue culture-treated dishes (Corning, VWR, 734-1703)

 ●
 Petri dish, 100 mm (VWR, 392-0245)
 ●
 Coverslip bottom µ-slides (Ibidi, cat. no. 80827)
 ● 24-Well plate for suspension culture (Thermo Scientiﬁc/VWR, cat. no. 734-2767)

 ● 70 µm diameter strainer, sterile (VWR, cat. no. 734-2761)

 ● Plastic molds for tissue embedding (ScienceService, Tissue-Tek TT Cryomold Biopsie, cat. no.


 SA62534-10)
 ● Glass capillaries for microinjection (WPI, cat. no. TW150-4)

 ● Formvar Supported Copper Single Hole Grid (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. TEM-FFGA100-CU-50)


 Software
 ●
 Imaris x64 version 7.7.1 to perform surface and volume rendering
 ● Image J 1.53q; Java 1.8.0_265 (64-bit)
 ● Adobe photoshop CC 2017

 ● Adobe Illustrator CC 2017


1908 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 ●
 Nikon NIS Elements Imaging Software Version 5.01.00, 64 bit
 ● LAS X Core 3.7.5 24914 Leica Software
 ● Chromium Single Cell 3′ Reagent Kits v3 from 10x genomics


 Reagent setup
 Stem cell culture
 mTeSR1 medium
 Thaw mTeSR1 5× supplement at RT or overnight at 4 °C and mix it into the mTeSR1 basal medium.
 Add 1% (vol/vol) of penicillin–streptomycin solution (10,000 units). This medium can be stored at
 4 °C for up to 2 weeks. Prepared into aliquots it can be stored at −20 °C for 6 months or until
 expiring. Thaw frozen aliquots at RT or at 4 °C overnight.

 Matrigel
 Prepare aliquots of Matrigel. All plastic wares, such as tubes or tips exposed to Matrigel, must be
 chilled in advance (minimum 10 min at −20 °C). Thaw the Matrigel on ice. Prepare aliquots in 1.5 ml
 tubes and store them immediately at −20 °C until the expiration date. For the Matrigel concentration,
 refer to the lot-speciﬁc datasheet to calculate the aliquot volume.

 Matrigel-coated dishes
 For coating with Matrigel, keep all plastic wares exposed to Matrigel chilled below 10 °C. Thaw the aliquot
 on ice. Dilute it to the required working concentration with ice-cold DMEM/F12 (for the appropriate
 dilution, see the Matrigel product lot certiﬁcate) and pour the dilution immediately into the dishes
 (60 mm dishes can contain a minimum volume of 2 ml). Incubate for 1 h at 37 °C for coating. Aspirate
 the dilution and add mTeSR1 for immediate cell seeding or DMEM/F12 with 1% (vol/vol)
 penicillin–streptomycin (10,000 U) for storage for up to 1 week at 37 °C. Do not let the dish or plate dry
 out or remain without any liquid at any time, and reﬁll evaporated liquid with DMEM/F12.

 Rock inhibitor (Y-27632 2HCl) 50 mM stock solution
 For thawing human iPSCs and induction of differentiation, it is recommended to use Rock inhibitor
 (Y-27632 2HCl) at a concentration of 10 µm. For this, prepare a 50 mM stock solution with the respective
 volume of warmed (55 °C, water bath) DMSO and place aliquots at −80 °C for up to 2 years.

 Mowiol
 Refer to the manufacturer´s protocol. In brief, mix 6 g with 2.4 g Mowiol and stir for 1 h at RT on a
 magnetic stirrer. Add 6 ml distilled H2O and stir for another 1 h at RT. Next, add 12 ml 0.2 M
 Tris–HCl and incubate for 2 h at 50 °C, stirring every 20 min for 2 min. Mowiol can be stored at
 −20 °C for up to 1 year.

 Base and differentiation media
 Stages 1–4 (from neurosphere to OVB organoids) of this differentiation protocol use custom media
 supplemented with the components detailed in Tables 4 and 5. Note that several components are used
 for both media. Mix all ingredients in a sterile Falcon tube for each medium (listed in Tables 4 and 5,
 respectively) and warm it in a 37 °C water bath to dissolve the materials. Avoid extended light
 exposure when using all media. Prepare the media fresh on setting up the rotary suspension culture.
 For subsequent media changes, media can be stored up to 2 weeks at 4 °C. RPE cells that were isolated
 from OVB organoids have to be cultured in ‘RPE medium’, and this composition is listed in Table 6.

 Fixation and blocking solutions
 ● 4% PFA: handle PFA powder only under a fume hood. To prepare the PFA ﬁxation buffer, dissolve 4 g
 of PFA powder in 100 ml PBS and heat the mixture under stirring up to 75 °C in a water bath until the
 solution is clear. Prepare small aliquots (~10 ml) of 4% (wt/vol) PFA freshly and store immediately at
 −20 °C for up to 1 year or longer. After thawing, it should be stored at 4 °C and used within 2 weeks.
 PFA is the preferred ﬁxative for organoids
 ●
 Ice-cold methanol: to ﬁx adherent cells, use methanol. Store methanol at –20 °C so it is ice cold when
 you want to use it ! CAUTION Methanol is inﬂammable, and direct contact leads to immediate damage
 to health. It has allergenic, carcinogenic, mutagenic and reprotoxic effects. Wear gloves and eye
 protection and a mask or breathing protection.

NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1909

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 ●
 Permeabilization buffer: dissolve 0.5% (vol/vol) Triton X-100 in PBS. Transfer Triton X-100 carefully
 with a cut 1,000 µl micropipette tip since it is viscous. Store at 4 °C for up to 3 months
 ! CAUTION Triton X-100 damages metals and burns body tissues; may cause serious eye damage;
 causes health damage; eye, skin and/or respiratory organs irritation; harmful to aquatic organisms and
 toxic. Avoid aerosol formation and release to the environment, and wear protective gloves, eye
 protection and face protection.
 ● Blocking buffer/antibody dilution buffer: dissolve 0.5% ﬁsh gelatin (wt/vol) in PBS. Prepare blocking


 buffer freshly and sterile autoclave it. Store it at 4 °C for up to 3 months and regularly check for
 bacterial contamination, indicated by turbidity and unpleasant smell of the solution.

 Equipment setup
 Rotary suspension system
 Before starting, a practical thought is whether you plan to use a rotary suspension system (e.g.,
 spinner ﬂasks) or a reciprocal shaker. If using such a device, install into an incubator beforehand.

Procedure

 CRITICAL The OVB organoid differentiation protocol takes ~8 weeks to complete, plus 2–3 weeks in
 c


 advance to expand the iPSCs, including assessing the organoids at the end of the differentiation (Fig. 1).
 Thus, if OVB organoids are desired in consecutive independent batches, we highly recommend
 conducting differentiations weekly depending on equipment availability.
 CRITICAL It is essential to follow the practice of good stem cell maintenance and stage-speciﬁc quality
 c


 checks. If iPSCs or OVB organoids do not meet the described criteria, we recommend starting a new
 experiment instead of proceeding with the ongoing batch.
 CRITICAL A good differentiation substantially depends on the quality of the starting material,
 c


 meaning a well-maintained contamination-free human iPSC culture as described in the ‘Experimental
 design’ section and in Stage 0, well-prepared media as listed in ‘Reagent setup’ and accurate performance
 of the following protocol. Pay special attention to the precise starting cell number in Step 22, which
 means 10,000 cells in 100 µl NIM (plus Rock inhibitor) per well.

 Stage 0: iPSCs culturing and seeding ● Timing ~10–15 d (10 min to 1 h/d hands on)
 CRITICAL Note that we here describe the culturing and the formation of neurospheres only from
 c


 feeder-free, on Matrigel (Corning)-coated cultured human iPSCs. Also note that there are alternatives to
 Matrigel from Corning, such as Geltrex (Life Technologies) or Vitronection XF (Stem Cell
 Technologies). However, we have yet to test whether those matrices are compatible with our protocol.
 1 Prepare a Matrigel-coated dish as described in ‘Reagent setup’. Usually, we culture iPSCs in 60 mm
 dishes, due to the size/growth area and amount of cells we have frozen per cryovial. However, it is
 possible to use 2 × 35 mm dishes or two wells of a six-well plate, that have both the same growth
 areas in sum. We prefer as our standard the 60 mm dishes for thawing.
 2 Thaw a vial of human iPSCs of the desired genotype quickly in a 37 °C water bath and transfer
 them into a 15 ml Falcon tube containing 10 mL DMEM/F12 prewarmed in a 37 °C water bath,
 using a 1 or 2 ml serological pipette.
 3 Centrifuge at 700g for 3 min at RT to pellet the cells. Meanwhile, take a Matrigel-coated dish,
 aspirate Matrigel solution and replace it with 3 ml mTeSR1 supplemented with 10 μM Rock
 inhibitor (Y-27632).
 4 Carefully aspirate the supernatant from the cell pellet and resuspend the cells in 1 ml
 mTeSR1 supplemented with 10 μM Rock inhibitor by using a 1 or 2 ml serological pipette or a cut
 1,000 µl micropipette tip (use sterile scissors to cut the tip).
 5 Transfer the cells into the prepared Matrigel-coated dish containing mTeSR1 and Rock inhibitor
 and distribute cells by adding them dropwise over the whole area/dish. Ensure an even distribution
 by moving the dish back and forth and in a left and right motion.
 6 Immediately place cells in a 37 °C incubator at 5% (vol/vol) CO2 as iPSCs will settle and attach to
 Matrigel within the next 15 min. Do not move the dish for the next 24 h. Then perform daily
 medium changes.
 7 Culture the cells until ~90% conﬂuency. Typically, it takes ~7 d after thawing to reach conﬂuency of
 90%. Note that the time varies depending on the growth rate of each cell line.


1910 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 Table 4 | Reagents for neurosphere medium

 Component: Final concentration

 DMEM/F12 48.4% (vol/vol)
 Neural basal medium 48.4% (vol/vol)
 N2 (100×) 0.4×
 B27 w/o vitamin A (100×)a 0.2×
 Glutamax (100×) 1×
 MEM (100×) 0.5×
 Insulin 0.2755 µM
 SB431542 2.5 µM
 Penicillin–streptomycin (10,000 U/ml) 100 U/ml
 β-Mercaptoethanol (50 mM) 5–50 µMb
 a
 The B27 supplement is sold as 50× (stock); 100× means use the 50x B27 supplement pure (100%) and add it as 0.2× as the ﬁnal concentration. bDepending on the vulnerability of your cell line
 and the experimental setup. If your cells are more vulnerable to oxidative stress, then use up to 50 µM as ﬁnal concentration.


 Table 5 | Reagent for OVB organoid medium

 Component Final concentration

 DMEM/F12 48.4% (vol/vol)
 Neural basal medium 48.4% (vol/vol)
 N2 (100×) 0.4×
 B27 + RA (100×)a 0.2× including 60 nMol retinol acetate
 Glutamax (100×) 1×
 MEM (100×) 0.5×
 Dorsomorphin 0.5 µM
 Insulin 0.2755 µM
 SB431542 5 µM
 Pen/Strep (10,000 U/ml) 100 U/ml
 β-Mercaptoethanol (50mMol) 5–50 µMb
 a
 The B27 supplement is sold as 50× (stock); 100× means use the 50x B27 supplement pure (100%) and add it as 0.2× as the ﬁnal concentration. bDepending on the vulnerability of your cell line
 and the experimental setup. If your cells are more vulnerable to oxidative stress, then use up to 50 µM as ﬁnal concentration.


 Table 6 | Reagents for RPE medium

 Component Final concentration

 DMEM/F12 87% (vol/vol)
 FBS 10% (vol/vol)
 Glutamax 1×
 MEM 1×
 Penicillin–streptomycin 100 U/ml and 100 µg/ml
 β-Mercaptoethanol 50 µM


 8 Before passaging the cells, prepare enough Matrigel-coated dishes or plates as described in ‘Reagent
 setup’ to continue the iPS cell propagation.
 9 Passage the cells. First, aspirate the medium and then remove the remaining medium by washing
 with DMEM/F12, prewarmed for a few minutes in a 37 °C warm water bath. Aspirate DMEM/F12
 and add 1 ml ReLeSR per 60 mm dish. Incubate for 30–60 s at RT. Aspirate ReLeSR leaves a thin

NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1911

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 Stage 0, steps 1–12
 Days –15 to –1
 Quality check, IF
 for pluripotency,
 Human iPSCs
 SCs mycoplasma check


 Stage 1, steps 13–27
 Induction of ectodermal
 Days 0–5
 differentiation


 Neurospheres
 eres Quality check,
 neurosphere
 morphology
 Stage 2, steps 28–34
 Days 5–10 Self-assembly and patterning,
 organoid formation


 Primitive
 organoidss Quality check, IF
 for RAX, VSX2
 Stage 3, steps 35–38 and FOXG1
 Days 10–30
 Formation of forebrain
 with primordial eye field


 Forebrain organoids with
 optic vesicles
 cles
 Quality check, IF
 for VSX2,
 Stage 4, steps 39–40 Recoverin, NRL;
 Days 30–60 presence of
 pigmented RPEs
 OVB organoids with
 optic vesicles


 Human iPSCs Neural Neurospheres Brain organoids with eye field OVB organoids
 differentiation primordia
 Stage 0 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4
 Steps 1–12 Steps 13–27 Steps 28–34 Steps 35–38 Steps 39–43


 Fig. 1 | Overview of the four-stage OVB organoid differentiation from human iPSCs. Stage 0, Steps 1–12 (takes up
 to 15 d): human iPSCs are ﬁrst thawed and seeded onto Matrigel-coated dishes, expanded and quality checked. Stage 1,
 Steps 13–27: over the next 5 d, iPSCs are induced with ectodermal differentiation medium into neurospheres. Stage 2,
 Steps 28–34: after quality checking, neurospheres are further differentiated toward self-assembling into early stage
 brain organoids in the next 5 d. Stage 3, Steps 35–38: continued culturing until day 30 to generate forebrain organoids
 developing eye primordia. Stage 4, Steps 39–43: subsequent culturing of day 30 organoids results in forebrain
 organoids with OVs (OVB organoids) harboring both neuronal and non-neuronal cell types. Right: quality control
 parameters with selected markers for respective stages. Bottom: schematic summarizing the various steps of the
 differentiation protocol from iPSCs to the generation of OVB organoids. Adapted with permission from ref. 5, Elsevier.


 ﬁlm of liquid on the bottom of the dish. Incubate dish for 4–6 min at 37 °C. Also refer to the
 manufacturers’ instructions for general information about ReLeSR.
 CRITICAL STEP Usually, detaching with ReLeSR is a mild procedure for human iPSCs, and in
 c


 our experience, most lines can be passaged without Rock inhibitor when using ReLeSR. However,
 depending on the nature of the mutation, certain patient iPSC lines might be more vulnerable to
 detaching and newly attaching stress, and thus display higher cell death rates. In those cases, we
 recommend using Rock inhibitor not only for thawing, but also for each passaging.
 10 Once the iPS cell aggregates/patches round up on the bottom of the dish (usually after 4 min), stop
 ReLeSR incubation by adding 1 ml mTeSR1 medium. Gently tap the sides of the dish to detach

1912 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 patches. Then, gently pipette up and down with a 1 or 2 ml serological pipette or a cut 1,000 µl
 micropipette tip to get iPS cells as small aggregates into suspension. Carefully pipette suspension up
 and down to disintegrate into smaller patches but not into single cells.
 11 Transfer small patches into new Matrigel-coated dishes/plates in a ratio of 1:4 to 1:8. Place the
 dishes/plates with freshly seeded iPSCs into an incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO2. When placing them
 on the incubator shelf, ensure the cell patches are distributed equally all over the dish/plate by
 moving it carefully three times back and front and then three times from left to right (+ shape). Do
 not forget to freeze vials as a backup. Many examples of standard cryopreservation protocols of
 human iPSCs are available in the literature50,51.
 CRITICAL STEP Dishes/plates are placed in the incubator within 15 min after seeding. Distribute
 c
 the cell patches equally as described, and do not move the dish/plate for the next 24–48 h. Any
 movement of dishes/plates (to check cells under a microscope, for example) could disturb the cells’
 attachment and result in substantial cell loss.
 12 Culture iPSCs until they display a correct morphology and preferably passage them one time
 (by repeating Steps 8–11) before proceeding to Step 13 to begin the differentiation process. Typically,
 healthy viable iPSCs grow as patches with their typical morphology under bright ﬁeld microscopy
 (Fig. 2). At this point, we recommended testing for the pluripotency by immunostaining for standard
 pluripotent markers of OCT4, Nanog, SSEA4, TRA-1-60 and TRA-1-81 (for details, see Box 1).


 Stage 1: start of differentiation ● Timing 5 d (1–2 h/d hands on)
 CRITICAL Prepare media, Accutase and Rock inhibitor plates, Neubauer chamber or cell counter,
 c


 Falcon tubes, microscope, centrifuge and water bath in advance.
 CRITICAL Stage 1 is time sensitive until Step 26. Once iPSCs are single cells, the procedure should be
 c


 performed promptly to prevent cell death and failure of the experiment.
 CRITICAL The number of iPSCs you need for starting with Stage 1 depends on the number of OVB
 c


 organoids you want to generate. For example, to use all the wells of the 96-well low-adherent v-bottom
 plate and thus generate 96 OVB organoids, you would need 960,000 iPSCs. One 60 mm dish of human
 iPSCs (or, accordingly, two 35 mm dishes or two wells of a six-well plate) will obtain sufﬁcient iPSCs for
 the start of a full 96-well low-adherent v-bottom plate with 96 organoids.
 CRITICAL Be aware that this experiment will last up to 60 d of culture. Thus, we strongly recommend
 c


 ensuring the ready availability of all equipment, consumables, media and components in a sterile
 environment. Precise planning of the cell culture is strictly recommended, do not rush and do not move
 on when a particular step is not fulﬁlled.
 CRITICAL Cells freshly thawed from frozen vials usually take time to recover. Most likely, they also
 c


 display aberrant proliferation, and the morphology may look unhealthy with cell debris. Therefore, do
 not start the differentiation with freshly thawed cells. Follow Stage 0 entirely before proceeding with
 Stage 1.
 13 Prewarm Accutase, NIM and DMEM/F12 in a 37 °C water bath. Check your prepared 60 mm dish,
 35 mm dish or six-well plate with iPSCs for a sufﬁcient conﬂuence of 80–90%, and stem cell
 morphology under a microscope. As shown in Fig. 2a, iPSC colonies should have a smooth rim and
 contain small, round and homogeneous-looking cells with a small nucleus/cytoplasm ratio and
 prominent dark nucleoli.
 14 Aspirate the medium from the dish and wash off the remaining stem cell medium once with
 DMEM/F12, prewarmed in a 37 °C water bath.
 15 Aspirate DMEM/F12 and add 1 ml of warm Accutase into the dish (if using a smaller or bigger
 dish, adjust the amount of Accutase accordingly) and incubate at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 5 min.
 16 Check for cell detachment under a microscope.
 ● If Accutase treatment has been successful, cells will be rounded up and ﬂoating in the medium or


 easily detached from the bottom by tapping the side of the dish (Fig. 2b). Then, resuspend the cells
 to single cells by pipetting up and down gently with a 1 ml micropipette ten times by ﬂushing the
 complete bottom of the dish
 ● If cells do not round up and detach after 5 min of Accutase treatment, collect the hiPS cells that


 have already detached and repeat the Accutase treatment for another 5 min. If iPSCs still did not
 separate, cells were (i) over conﬂuent and overgrown and/or (ii) differentiated. In both cases, do
 not proceed with this batch but start a new differentiation experiment with excellent fresh iPSCs
 ? TROUBLESHOOTING


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1913

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 a b
 Before accutase treatment in the dish After accutase treatment in the dish


 200 µm 200 µm


 c d
 Single cells in a counting chamber Before centrifugation in a 96-well ‘v’ bottom


 200 µm 200 µm


 e f
 After centrifugation in a 96-well ‘v’ bottom Half-medium change in
 96-well v-bottom plate


 200 µm

 Fig. 2 | Overview of preparing iPSCs for a successful differentiation into OVB organoids. a, Bright-ﬁeld image of a
 typical iPSCs clone. Note the sharp edges with compact colonies are indicative of a healthy culture. b, Bright-ﬁeld
 image showing dispersing and detaching iPSCs after an Accutase treatment. Note that when the Accutase treatment
 is successful, cells display a round shape and ﬂoat. c, Bright-ﬁeld image of cell counting. Distribution of single cells in
 a counting chamber. d, Dispensed cells in one well of a 96-well low-adherent v-bottom plate. A bright-ﬁeld image
 shows before the centrifuge step where cells are distributed equally over the well. e, A bright-ﬁeld image shows cells
 in a ‘v’ bottom well after centrifugation. Note that cells have settled down at the bottom. f, Strategy for medium
 change without disrupting or affecting the settled cells in the ‘v’ bottom wells.


 17 Stop Accutase treatment by adding the same volume of 37 °C warm DMEM/F12, for example, add
 1 ml DMEM/F12 into a dish with 1 ml of Accutase. Pipette up and down ﬁve times in the dish.
 18 Transfer the cell suspension into a 15 ml centrifuge tube that contains 3× the volume (of Accutase)
 of warm DMEM/F12.
 19 Spin down for 3 min and 700g at RT.
 20 Aspirate the supernatant without disturbing the pellet and resuspend the cell pellet in 1 ml NIM.
 Add 10 µM Rock inhibitor.


1914 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 21 Count living cells accurately using a counting chamber (Fig. 2c). While counting the cells, ensure the
 culture is in a single-cell suspension. If cell aggregates are found, carefully resuspend them again.
 CRITICAL STEP It is essential to seed 10,000 single living cells per well since the starting cell


 c
 number has a crucial impact on differentiation.
 ? TROUBLESHOOTING
 22 Calculate a cell suspension of 100,000 cells/ml to distribute 10,000 cells in 100 µl in each well.
 Estimate how many OVB organoids are required. Set up a master mix in a 15 ml Falcon tube.
 Here is an example of generating 50 OVB organoids (the number of wells is equivalent to the
 number of organoids to be generated):
 ● Determine the number of organoids to be generated. For example, 50 OVB organoids.


 N ORG ¼ 50

 ● Calculate the total volume (Vtotal) needed for 50 wells. One organoid per well: number of
 organoids equals the number of well. Each well should contain a volume of 100 µl. Calculate the
 Vtotal for 50 wells:


 V total ¼ N ORG ´ 0:1 ml

 V total ¼ 50 ´ 0:1 ml ¼ 5 ml

 ● Calculate the volume of the iPSCs suspension. Generating one OVB organoid requires 10,000
 iPSCs, that is, equal to 10,000 iPSCs per well. Calculate the number of cells (NiPSC) needed:


 N iPSC ¼ N ORG ´ 104 iPSCs
 ¼ 50 ´ 104 iPSCs
 ¼ 0:5 ´ 106 iPSCs

 ● If you resuspend the cell pellet in 1 ml of NIM, calculate the volume containing 0.5 × 106 iPSCs. For
 this, count the number of cells with your counting chamber and get the iPSC number per ml Ntotal. As
 an example, you count 2 million cells in the 1 ml resuspension. The result is 2 × 106 cells/ml in 1 ml,
 thus Ntotal = 2 × 106. Then calculate in how much volume are 0.5 × 106 iPSC (ViPSC):
 1 ml
 V iPSC ¼ N iPSC ´
 Ntotal
 1 ml
 V iPSC ¼ 0:5 ´ 106 ´ ¼ 0:25 ml
 2 ´ 106

 ● Calculate the ﬁnal volume of Rock inhibitor (VRocki) from a 50 mM stock solution to a ﬁnal
 concentration of 10 µM:

 1
 50 mM=10 μM ¼ 5; 000 ! ¼ Dilution Factor ðDFÞ
 5; 000

 V Rocki ¼ V total =5; 000

 V Rocki ¼ 5 ml=5; 000 ¼ 0:001 ml ¼ 1 μl

 ● Calculate the volume of NIM medium (VNIM):
 V NIM ¼ V total  V iPSC  V Rocki

 V NIM ¼ 5 ml  0:25 ml  0:001 ml ¼ 4:749 ml


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1915

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 ● Master Mix (MMXX) for 50 OVB organoids (MM50) and harvested iPSC number of 2 million per
 ml (this is the iPSC suspension to be distributed as 100 µl portion per well into the 96-well
 low-adherent v-bottom plate):


 MMXX ¼ V NIM þ V iPSC þ V Rocki

 MM50 ¼ 4:749 ml þ 0:25 ml þ 0:001 ml

 c CRITICAL STEP Mix cell suspension for counting and master mix well each time you transfer a
 portion of 100 µl into the wells. Ensure that all wells get the same volume and cell number. Accurate cell
 number per well will determine the grade of homogeneity of OVB organoids regarding the size and
 composition of organoids later.
 23 Check wells under a microscope before proceeding to the next step. Cells should be evenly distributed
 across each well, and the number of cells per well should be approximately equal (Fig. 2d).
 24 Spin down plate for 3 min at 700g at RT.
 CRITICAL STEP For easier handling of the 96-well plates, wrap Paraﬁlm around the plate and the
 c


 lid horizontally. This will prevent accidentally lifting the plate’s lid when placed and removed from
 the centrifuge plate holder.
 25 Check under the microscope that cells should have slid down on the bottom of the well and are not
 stuck on the walls anymore (Fig. 2e). Also check the walls of the wells if cells got attached at the side
 and did not slide down to the center of the wells.
 CRITICAL STEP If cells are not accumulated on the bottom, troubleshooting must be performed
 c


 immediately.
 ? TROUBLESHOOTING
 26 Incubate plate incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO2. This day counts as day 0 of the differentiation.
 CRITICAL STEP To ensure cells from the bottom of the wells are not shaken up again, handle the
 c


 plate with exceptional care, and set down the plate carefully and gently on the shelf of the incubator.
 CRITICAL STEP If you have wrapped Paraﬁlm around the plate, remember to remove it at this
 c


 point. If it is not removed, gas exchange is disabled.
 27 Change half the medium daily by aspirating 50 µl medium from each well with a micropipette and
 adding 50 µl fresh NIM without disturbing the cells on the bottom. Check cells at every media
 change. From day 2 onward, one can observe semi-rounded and dense spheres on the bottom of the
 wells, depending on the microscope used. Typically, a successful differentiation will result in slightly
 polarized neurospheres in which the dark region would be present at one of the poles. Depending
 on the microscope used, one can also observe a thin lining in the middle of the neurospheres, which
 would be assembled as VZ in the later stage (Fig. 3a).
 CRITICAL STEP It is essential to ensure that the tip is dipped deep enough into the well (along the
 c


 side of the well) to aspirate 50 µl of medium without sucking air and creating bubbles, but do not
 touch the cells on the bottom of the well with the tip (Fig. 2f ).

 Stage 2: self-assembly, patterning, neurospheres and organoid formation ● Timing 5 d
 (1 h on day 5, 10 min days 6–10 hands on)
 28 Collect neurospheres from the 96-well plate. Collect them individually by cutting a 200 µl pipette
 tip with sterile scissors and carefully transferring neurospheres with the remaining medium, and
 pooling them all together into one 35 or 60 mm Petri dish.
 CRITICAL STEP To ensure neurospheres are transferred, set the pipette to >100 µl volume to be
 c


 sure to take the complete content of 100 µl of the well. Pipette carefully once up and down slowly
 and then once up quickly. You may see the neurospheres swimming in the tip. If not, transfer the
 pipette tip content into the 35 or 60 mm Petri dish and search for the neurosphere. If you cannot
 conﬁrm the transfer, check the well of the 96-well low-adherent v-bottom plate under the
 microscope. If the neurosphere remains in the well, add 100 µl NIM into this well and repeat the
 transfer.
 29 Perform a quality check under a microscope. Neurospheres should have a bright and smooth rim
 with visible rosette structures in them.
 ? TROUBLESHOOTING
 30 Transfer neurospheres one by one into a 100 mm Petri dish containing 10 ml ‘neurosphere
 medium’ and 0.1% Matrigel solution.

1916 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 ? TROUBLESHOOTING
 Keep a maximum of 50 neurospheres per 100 mm dish.
 31 Distribute neurospheres as suspension cultures evenly so that they are not in contact with each
 other by moving the dish in the hood and incubator carefully forward–backward and left–right.
 32 Incubate at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in the incubator. This will be day 5 of the differentiation protocol.
 33 Check every day to ensure neurospheres remain separated and are not in contact with each other.
 Move the dish forward–backward and left–right (+ sign) to distribute them evenly.
 ? TROUBLESHOOTING
 34 On day 8, add 2 ml of OVB organoid medium (not neurosphere medium).

 Stages 3 and 4: rotary suspension culture of neurospheres leading to the formation of
 forebrain organoids with primordial eye ﬁeld and maturation into OVB organoids
 ● Timing (30 d, 1 h/d for 10 days, 30 min/week, hands on)
 35 Culture neurospheres in a spinner ﬂask (option A) or in Petri dishes (option B)
 (A) Spinner ﬂask culture
 (i) Prepare fresh OVB organoid medium and ﬁll 100 ml into a 250 ml spinner ﬂask and
 transfer the spinner ﬂask to an incubator at 37°C and 5% CO2 for at least 30 min to
 prewarm. Do not culture more than 80 neurospheres per 100 ml.
 (ii) Place the spinner ﬂask under the sterile hood and open one of the side arms.
 (iii) Cut the pipette tip of a 1,000 µl micropipette with sterile scissors and carefully transfer
 neurospheres from the Petri dish into the spinner ﬂask, plunge the micropipette into the
 spinner ﬂask through a sidearm of the bottle and place neurospheres into the medium.
 CRITICAL STEP To avoid contamination, it is essential to clean the scissors thoroughly
 c


 with 70% ethanol before cutting the tip and clean the complete micropipette
 thoroughly with 70% ethanol since you will plunge it into the spinner ﬂask. Clean the
 pipette thoroughly before transferring neurospheres into each new spinner bottle.
 CRITICAL STEP Do not place more than 80 neurospheres per 100 ml medium. An
 c


 excess of spheres might cause them to clump together.
 (iv) Close the bottle and place it on the stirring platform in the incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO2.
 CRITICAL STEP Do not tightly close all the lids of the bottle. Keep the lids of the arms
 c


 loose to enable gas exchange.
 (v) Perform half-medium changes weekly. Place the bottle under the sterile hood, let the
 organoids settle for 3 min and then carefully aspirate 50 ml of medium without disturbing
 the organoids. Next, add 50 ml of fresh OVB organoid medium prewarmed in a 37 °C
 water bath.
 (B) Petri dish culture
 (i) Prepare new OVB organoid medium. Set up a reciprocal shaker in the incubator and
 prepare a sufﬁcient number of Petri dishes containing 10 ml OVB organoid medium. Do
 not culture more than eight neurospheres per 10 ml.
 (ii) Place the new Petri dishes under the sterile hood.
 (iii) Cut the pipette tip of a 1,000 µl micropipette with clean scissors and carefully, transfer
 neurospheres into new Petri dishes with OVB medium.
 CRITICAL STEP Do not place more than eight neurospheres per 10 ml medium. An
 c


 excess of spheres might cause them to clump together.
 (iv) Transfer plates to a reciprocal shaker in an incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO2.
 (v) Perform half-medium change weekly. Take Petri dishes from the shaker and place them
 under the sterile hood. Move dishes in circles to collect all the neurospheres into the center
 of the dish. Withdraw 5 ml of medium with a serological pipette from the rim of the dish
 where no neurospheres are swimming. Add 5 ml of fresh OVB medium and place the
 dishes back on the shaker in the incubator.
 36 Observe organoids under a microscope. Between day 20 and day 30, pigmented spots on one side of
 the organoids will start to appear, indicating the formation of forebrain organoids with primitive
 eye ﬁelds. Often, an invaginating border at the organoid surface can be seen (Fig. 3b). Around day 30,
 organoids will develop intensely pigmented regions, which are easily seen in the spinner ﬂask
 (Fig. 3c). For comparing organoid sizes or the appearance of pigmented areas, it is convenient to
 temporarily transfer them to a Petri dish to take macroscopic photos. After acquiring the images,


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1917

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 a
 Stage 2: Self-assembly, patterning and neurosphere formation


 b c
 Stage 3: Brain organoids with eye field primordia
 Example batch 1


 Example batch 2


 d e
 Stage 4: Brain organoids with OVs (OVB organoids)
 i ii ***
 Pigment
 ** No pigment
 ns

 **
 100
 **** 100
 Percentage of organoids (%)


 80 ** ns 80
 ns ns
 60 ****
 Percentage (%)


 60

 iii iv v 40
 40

 20 ***
 20

 0
 0
 M 90

 35 6
 45 .1
 C .2
 S
 F1 525


 -iP
 F1 35
 36
 G R-


 o
 N e
 e
 rx
 IM


 n
 on
 2


 Tw
 O


 Donor iPSC lines OVs


 place them back into the rotary suspension culture (or on the shaker) and/or continue further
 analysis.
 CRITICAL STEP A successful differentiation has not occurred if these dark spots have not
 c


 appeared until day 30.
 37 (Optional) Selected organoids display pigmented regions to generate OVB organoids. Proceed to
 Step 39 to continue culturing until day 60.

1918 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
Fig. 3 | Overview of OVB organoid generation stages and characterizations. a, Bright ﬁeld image of neurospheres showing polarized organization of
neural epithelium. Note a thin line shows presumably the primitive VZ lumen. Red pins point to the thin line (middle and right). Scale bars, 200 µm
(left), 100 µm (middle) and 50 µm (right). b, Bright-ﬁeld images of day 30 organoids with primitive eye primordium. At least two independent batches
of organoids are shown. Magniﬁed images on the right show lightly pigmented OVs at one of the poles of the organoid (arrows). Scale bars, 1 mm and
200 µm (for magniﬁed image). c, Day 30 organoids display intensely pigmented regions in the spinner ﬂask. The magniﬁed bottom image shows
visibly clear OVs of the OVB organoids. The right image shows a batch of 60-d-old OVB organoids. d, Reproduced from the original paper5.
Representative 60-d-old OVB organoids are displaying strongly pigmented OVs in a bilaterally symmetric manner. Cell lines used: IMR-90 (i and ii),
F13535.1 (iii and v) and GM25256 (iv). Scale bar, 1 mm. Magniﬁcations in ii show the same OVB organoid. Scale bar, 200 µm. e, Reproduced from the
original paper5. The bar diagram on the left shows the percentages of organoids displaying OVs. Various donor cell lines are labeled on the x axis of the
left-hand graph. The number of organoids generated from each donor line is stated below. Donor 1 (IMR-90): 95 organoids (from ﬁve batches); donor
2 (GM25256): 280 organoids (from ﬁve batches); donor 3 (F13535.1: 87 organoids (from four batches); donor 4 (F14536.2): 32 organoids (from three
batches); donor 5 (Crx-iPS): 241 organoids (from three batches). The bar diagram on the right shows the percentages of organoids displaying two, one
or no OVs from donor 1 (IMR-90). Statistics: two-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s multiple comparisons test. Error bars show ± s.e.m. Signiﬁcance
values for each cell line are shown on the graph. Panels d and e adapted with permission from ref. 5, Elsevier.


 38 At this point, it is desirable to immunostain and image the organoids for the forebrain patterning
 and eye ﬁeld speciﬁcation markers. In our case, we used labeled FOXG1, PAX6 and SOX2 regions
 as the forebrain patterning molecules and RAX and VSX2 regions as the primitive eye ﬁeld region.
 To immunolabel these nuclear markers, follow the method described in Box 2, which does not
 require using cooking pots for antigen retrieval. Additional assays to further characterize the
 30-d-old organoids are:
 ● scRNA-seq (for preparation, see Box 5)

 ● Bulk RNA-seq analysis (for preparation, see Box 6)

 ● Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (for preparation, see Box 7)


 Stage 4: continuous culturing day 30 into OVB organoids ● Timing (30 d, 30 min/week,
 hands on)
 39 Continue the spinner ﬂask or Petri dish culture for another 30 d, with a periodical supplying of new
 media every week by changing half of the medium. If there are 20–30 OVB organoids per spinner
 ﬂask, a medium change every second week is sufﬁcient.
 CRITICAL STEP Examine the ﬂasks for broken organoids or the presence of cell debris just by
 c


 opening the incubator. If so, take the ﬂasks or Petri dishes out and check for debris or
 contamination. If there are few broken organoids and the majority is intact, remove the broken
 ones or transfer intact organoids to a new ﬂask or Petri dish. Debris and broken organoids can stick
 to intact ones and destroy the complete culture. If there is bacterial or fungal contamination,
 discard all the organoids.
 40 Continue culturing up to day 60. This will result in one or two intensely pigmented objects
 restricted to one of the poles of the organoids, indicating the presence of OVs attached to the
 forebrain region of the organoid (Fig. 3c). In our experiments, the formation of bilateral OVs also
 depends on the cell lines we used. Thus, the number of OVs one could observe will vary according
 to the genetic background of the iPSCs used.
 ? TROUBLESHOOTING
 41 Immunostain organoids (see below Box 2), to test for the presence of RAX (photoreceptor cell fate
 determinant and eye ﬁeld speciﬁcation) positive regions and RPE cells (Phalloidin or RPE65)
 (Fig. 4a–c). Deﬁnitive retinal cell types (BRN3: RGCs; VSX2: neural retina and neural retinal
 progenitors; Recoverin: photoreceptor precursors; NRL: deﬁnitive retinal markers and fate
 determinant of rod photoreceptors) and cortical neurons (Synapsin1: presynaptic neurons; Tau:
 cortical neurons; MBP4: myelinated neurons; CTIP2: cortical layer 4–5) can also be stained for, as
 described previously5.
 42 (Optional) At this point, it is desirable to conduct a tracing experiment by injecting ﬂuorescently
 tagged Cholera toxin followed by tissue clearing and imaging as described previously5,10,52. This will
 reveal the bilaterality and visual projections into the brain tissue of an organoid. Follow the method
 detailed in Box 3, which has worked in our hands.
 43 (Optional) Perform additional assays to further characterize the 60-d-old organoids:
 ● scRNA-seq (for preparation, refer to Box 5)

 ● Bulk RNA-seq analysis (for preparation, refer to Box 6)

 ● TEM (for preparation, refer to Box 7)

 ● ERGs (for procedure, refer to Box 8)


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1919

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

Troubleshooting
Troubleshooting advice can be found in Table 7.


 Table 7 | Troubleshooting table

 Step Problem Possible reason Solution

 16 No rounding up and detachment of iPSCs, Accutase was inhibited by the remaining Aspirate Accutase and restart from Step 14
 as shown in Fig. 2b medium (washing Step 14 was skipped)
 Accutase concentration was too low (less Add more Accutase solution per dish
 than 1 ml per 60 mm dish was used) (minimum 1 ml per 60 mm dish) and
 restart from Step 15
 Accutase was not prewarmed to 37 °C in a Repeat Step 15 with warm Accutase and
 water bath or incubation was not at 37 °C incubate at 37 °C
 (enzyme activity is temperature dependent)
 iPSC cells were too conﬂuent, and Accutase Collect the Accutase with detached cells in
 could not reach efﬁciently all areas a 15 ml Falcon tube, add 4 ml warm
 DMEM/F12 (prewarmed to 37 °C in a
 water bath). Repeat Step 15 for the
 remaining attached cells in the dish
 Accutase was stored longer than 7 d at RT or Aliquot Accutase and store it at −20 °C.
 2 weeks at 4 °C (enzyme gets degraded) Keep it only for up to 2 weeks at 4 °C
 21 Cell clumps instead of single cells, as iPSCs were not dissociated properly by Resuspend the cells again 10× up and down
 shown in Fig. 2b pipetting up and down with an uncut 1,000 µl with a 1,000 µl micropipette. Do not
 micropipette tip in Step 16 proceed with the protocol if you cannot
 dissociate to single cells anymore
 Low iPSC number iPSC in the dish were not conﬂuent enough, Adjust the number of organoids you want
 and cell amount appeared higher than to generate to the number of obtained
 expected iPSCs. Do not use less than 10,000 iPSC
 per well and organoid since changing the
 starting cell number will affect the
 differentiation
 25 Cells do not accumulate at the bottom of The g was too low due to incorrect Check the manual of your centrifuge for
 the well after centrifugation, as shown in calculation of r.c.f. or r.p.m. or defect of the calculating g. A minimum required g might
 Fig. 2e. Cells are still distributed all over centrifuge be 300g, and a maximum of 750g. Beyond
 the well after repeated centrifuging, and that g force, cell survival will be severely
 single cells or cell clumps are found at the affected and is not recommended
 side inside the wells. The outcome of the The centrifuge rotor is not a swing-out rotor, Check if the centrifuge has a swing-out
 experiment will be questionable if cells or holders cannot swing freely because of rotor. Check your centrifuge for defects and
 cannot accumulate on the bottom of a defect incorrect ﬁxation of the holders/adaptors
 the wells
 Low-adherent 96-well v-bottom plates were Use low-adherent plates
 not used
 28 Dead cell clumps or broken aggregates On day 0 in Step 22, Rock inhibitor was not Make sure to add Rock inhibitor at a ﬁnal
 are formed instead of neurospheres. Note added to the master mix or was not concentration of 10 µM into the single cell
 that in any of the following cases there is functional, and cells died suspension. If you are unsure about the
 no way to ﬁx the batch anymore. Do not storage time of the aliquot, thaw a fresh
 proceed with the protocol. Instead, restart aliquot of Rock inhibitor
 from the beginning with fresh iPSCs Centrifuge Step 24 has not been successfully See Troubleshooting advice for Step 25
 performed, and cells were not in touch with
 each other
 The plate was not carefully placed into the Handle the plate carefully after the
 incubator or shaken after centrifuge Step 24, centrifugation step. If the plate is moved
 and the pellet was disturbed harshly by accident, check under a
 microscope and repeat Step 24 to make
 sure that all cells are accumulated in the
 center of the wells
 Centrifugation in Step 24 was too harsh and Do not centrifuge higher than 750g
 cells died
 Daily medium change was not performed and Strictly follow the daily half-medium
 cells died change in Step 27. Do not modify this daily
 half-medium change by adding full medium
 volume and skipping 1 d, for example
 Table continued


1920 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 Table 7 (continued)
 Step Problem Possible reason Solution

 Bacterial, viral or fungal contamination Work strictly under sterile conditions and
 happens during the procedure perform regular tests for contamination of
 your cell lines
 Procedure from Steps 14–26 took too much Prepare all reagents and equipment in
 time and cells died advance and ensure that Steps 14–27 can
 be performed without interruptions. Work
 fast and focused but do not rush
 Neurospheres were not transferred with a cut Always cut the tip for transferring
 tip in Step 28 neurospheres to not disrupt the spheres
 29 Neurospheres do not have a bright rim, Cyst-like structures are a sign of unwanted In any of the cases there is no way to ﬁx
 no rosette-like structures, but rather cyst- differentiation or misdifferentiation toward this batch anymore. Do not proceed with
 like structures the extra-embryonic mesoderm and the protocol. Restart from the beginning
 endoderm with fresh iPSCs
 Most likely, single iPSCs were accidentally Pay extra attention to resuspend the cell
 resupended in mTeSR1 instead of NIM in pellet after the Accutase incubation in 1 ml
 Step 20 and/or 22 of NIM, do not use by accident mTeSR1
 (Step 20). Also, use NIM for the master
 mix in Step 22
 Using higher ﬁnal concentrations of Rock Use Rock inhibitor at a ﬁnal concentration
 inhibitor (>10 µM) can inhibit ectodermal of 10 µM
 differentiation
 Rock inhibitor is dissolved in DMSO in a too When dissolving Rock inhibitor in DMSO,
 low stock concentration and thus, the volume prepare a stock concentration of 50 mM to
 of DMSO added to the master mix is >1% make sure that you add a low volume of
 (vol/vol). DMSO in higher concentration can DMSO (<1%) to the master mix
 have an inﬂuence on the differentiation
 Starting cell number was too high in Step 22 Use the correct starting cell number
 Instead of NIM, a different medium such as Ensure the correct medium is used
 mTeSR was used
 Due to mutations or transgenic engineering, Verify if your iPSC line’s mutation allows a
 the cell line cannot differentiate along the neural differentiation (for example, if you
 neural lineage have generated a gene knockout, double-
 check if this is not embryonic lethal)
 30 Matrigel does not dissolve in the medium The handling temperature of Matrigel was Use chilled pipette tips to add Matrigel.
 but forms a solid gel clump above 10 °C. Alternatively, Matrigel was not Calculate the volume of Matrigel stock
 mixed immediately with the medium in needed to obtain a 0.1% ﬁnal concentration
 the dish in the medium. Predilute this volume in 1 ml
 of cold ‘neurosphere medium’ in a cold vial,
 mix it with a cold pipette tip and transfer
 this to the 9 ml of ‘neurosphere medium’
 into the 100 mm dish. Mix medium well
 immediately
 33 Neurospheres do attach to the bottom of A tissue culture (TC)-treated dish was used If the mistake is observed on day 1 and
 the dish and all neurospheres are attached to the there are not so many cells already
 bottom of the dish outgrown as a monolayer around the
 neurospheres, detach the neurospheres
 with a cell scraper and transfer them to a
 Petri dish. Check them every day and move
 the dish forward and backward and left
 to right
 Few neurospheres attach even to a low- Detach all neurospheres with a cell scraper.
 adherent (Petri) dish in rare cases Check every day and move the dish forward
 and backward and left to right
 40 Neurospheres and later OVB organoids If neurospheres and/or organoids show a Make sure that 104 iPS cells in 100 µl NIM
 are different in sizes and only a small high grade of heterogeneity, the starting cell are distributed equally to each well. Cells of
 portion exhibits pigmented areas number of 104 iPSCs per well was not the cell suspension sink down to the
 followed. Either the tube with the cell bottom of the 15 ml tube over time,
 suspension was not mixed well before each therefore, shake the tube every time you
 taking out of the 100 µl volume or volume for take out 100 µl of the cell suspension
 each well differed from each other (pipette Each time, check the volume in the pipette
 error, clocked ﬁlter tip) tip and change tip if bubbles occur in the tip
 Table continued


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1921

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 Table 7 (continued)
 Step Problem Possible reason Solution

 Pigmented areas do not appear Differentiation of OVB organoids was not Usually, the pigmented areas appear
 successful. Organoids did not increase in size ~day 20–30. However, different laboratory
 or are broken into parts over time. General conditions, cell lines and handling can
 handling and conditions may not be result in different timelines. Check day 30
 optimized yet and have an impact on the organoids for the presence of VZs, neurons,
 cultures retinal progenitors and growth/absence of
 massive cell death. This will ensure that the
 protocol, in principle, works. Continue
 culturing until day 60
 Check for contamination (especially
 mycoplasma contamination)
 No retinoic acetate was added to the medium Make sure using B27 supplement with
 in the form of B27 supplement retinoic acetate (vitamin A) for
 OVB medium
 iPSC line is not capable of differentiation to Double check the background of your
 RPE cells/progenitors due to a patient iPSC line
 mutation, transgenic manipulations or a
 CRISPR knockout
 Box 5, White DNA smear sticks cells together, DNase I was not added or is not functional in Prepare DNase I and add it freshly to the
 Step 8 big clumps are forming Box 5, Step 4. Undigested DNA/chromatin Accutase digestion solution. DNase I
 released from dead/busted cells sticks to activity is Mg2+ and Ca2+ dependent, thus
 intact cells, form a big clump and results in a make sure the buffer contains it
 low number of single cells


Timing
 OVB organoid generation will take 60 d, and including iPSC thawing and expansion, it will take 75 d
 (2.5 months) in total.
 Steps 1–12, iPSCs culturing and seeding (Stage 0): ~2 weeks, depending on how fast the human iPSC
 line recovers from cryopreservation.
 Steps 13–27, start of differentiation, neurospheres formation (Stage 1): 5 d
 Steps 28–34, self-assembly, patterning, organoid formation (Stage 2): 5 d
 Steps 35–38, rotary suspension culture of neurospheres leading to the formation of forebrain organoids
 with primordial eye ﬁeld (Stage 3): 20 d
 Steps 39–43, further culture leading to mature into OVB organoids (Stage 4): 30 d
 Box 1, Preparation and immunostaining of human iPSCs for pluripotency check: 7 d
 Box 2, IF and imaging: 3–6 d
 Box 3, Tracing experiment: 2 d
 Box 4, RPE isolation and expansion: 2 weeks
 Box 5, Dissection of OVB organoids for scRNA analysis: 1 h
 Box 6, Preparation of OVB organoids for bulk RNA-seq: ~6 h
 Box 7, Preparation of OVB organoids for electron microscopy: 5 d
 Box 8, Preparation and performing ERG experiments: 2 d


Anticipated results
 OVB organoids generated with this protocol should exhibit both brain and retina characteristics
 within a single organoid system. Notably, OVB organoids display cells derived from neuro (neuronal
 cell types) and surface ectoderm (non-neuronal cell types of corneas and lens), overcome the need to
 fuse two different kinds of organoids (such as brain and retinal organoids). Furthermore, while the
 success rate of OVB organoid generation with this protocol may depend on the particular cell line,
 this protocol is robust as we could generate OVB organoids from a variety of genetic backgrounds
 (Fig. 3d,e)5. Therefore, studying OVB organoid generation from disease states (such as early retinal
 dystrophy, CHARGE syndrome and FOXG1 syndrome) can be potentially very useful in investigating
 disease pathogenesis and testing new treatment options.


1922 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 ai ii b
 Toluidine blue Bright field, RPE pigment DNA/RAX


 c
 Merge Phalloidin, RPE cells Arl13B, primary cilia


 Fig. 4 | Initial characterization of OVB organoids. a, Macroscopic toluidine blue staining of a section cut through an
 OV of a 60-d-old OVB organoid displaying anatomical structures (i). Refer to the procedure of toluidine blue
 staining73. A similar area shows a heavily pigmented region of RPEs, which shows the natural dark color
 pigmentation (ii). These two 60-d-old OVB organoids were generated from cell line GM25256, and both images
 were taken with transmission light. Scale bar, 50 µm. b, 30-d-old organoid with a primitive eye ﬁeld displays RAX-
 positive primordial eye ﬁeld (magenta). The cell line used in this experiment is IMR-90. Scale bar, 50 µm. c, A
 representative image displaying the typical arrangement of the RPE cell layer in a 60-d-old OVB organoid. The
 honeycomb-shaped RPE cells are labeled by phalloidin (yellow). Phalloidin is a TRITC-conjugated toxin that binds
 preferentially to polymerized F-actin. Each RPE cell harbors a primary cilium (Arl13B, red). The cell line used in this
 experiment is IMR-90. Scale bar, 10 µm.


 The primary assay to check differentiation efﬁciency throughout the protocol is qualitative
 immunoﬂuorescence imaging. This will identify relevant cell types at distinct stages of organoid
 development, and ensure their distribution pattern of in the expected topographically restricted
 manner5. When an early stage of organoid development is efﬁciently induced with appropriate
 precursors (which should be checked by immunoﬂuorescence), this will eventually generate the
 desired cell types in OVB organoids. Therefore, monitoring intermediate stages of organoid devel-
 opment will help the user pinpoint where any mistake occurs.
 On day 30 organoids, we recommend using markers such as SOX2 and PAX6, which should be
 expressed in the VZ where neurogenesis begins, and neuronal markers such as TUJ1 at the cortical
 plate. Notably, these two regions should spatially be separated as distinct layers. Mixing neuronal cell
 types at the ventricular region at this stage will reveal the occurrence of a misdifferentiation during
 the brain organoid development. Furthermore, one should observe invaginating borders at one of the
 poles along with the pigmented region (Fig. 3b). Immunostaining of the region around the pigmented
 area should be strongly positive for SOX2 and FOXG1 (ref. 5). This could mean that the forebrain
 patterning has successfully occurred, and the subsequent steps generating OVB organoids will
 proceed well.
 In day 60 organoids, the formation of OVs should be easily visible to the naked eye due to the
 pigment they accumulate. This ensures a successful differentiation protocol. Therefore, when
 checking differentiation efﬁciency via immunostaining, retinal cell types should express markers such
 as VSX2, Recoverin, NRL and CRX. In contrast, critical markers such as Synapsin, Tau and
 MAP2 should be expressed in cortical regions.
 OVB organoids generated with this protocol typically generate bilaterally symmetric OVs located
 at one of the poles of a brain organoid. One can further test the bilaterality, axonal and retinal
 connectivity projections into organoid tissues by injecting ﬂuorescently labeled tracers.
 Tracers such as ﬂuorescently labeled CTB have been used in several in vivo tracing studies. For
 example, Maiorano et al. injected CTB conjugated with Alexa 488 or 594 into the eyes of the murine
 visual system. In particular, the authors could trace and distinguish RGCs axons from the con-
 tralateral and ipsilateral retina53. Similarly, studies have analyzed the integrity of the optic tract by

NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1923

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 a
 CTB Cy5

 10 min light exposure and
 CTB GFP 24 h in spinner flasks - Fixation
 - Tissue clearing and
 - 3D imaging


 b
 i
 Transmission light/DAPI/CTB-488 CTB-488
 1 1 2


 3


 2
 3


 ii
 Transmission light/DAPI/CTB-488 CTB-488
 1 2


 2


 1


 c
 CTB GFP CTB Cy5 CTB GFP CTB GFP/CTB Cy5


 Site of injection


Fig. 5 | Tracing experiment using labeled CTB. a, Experimental scheme. An OVB organoid is injected with CTB-488 directly into an OV and CTB-647
into the second OV. The organoid is exposed to light for 10 min, cultured for 24 h and then ﬁxed with PFA. b, Following tissue clearing, the specimens
are imaged. Two independent examples are shown (i and ii). The image on top (i) shows merged transmission light with OV and dark pigmented area
at the injection site (red arrow), nuclear staining (blue, DAPI) and CTB-488 (green). The middle image shows the tracing of neuronal pathways by
CTB-488 spotted out by red pins. Right image 1 shows the magniﬁed area at the surface. Right images 2 and 3 show magniﬁed areas of deeper
neuronal layers receiving CTB-488. The bottom image (ii) is a second example of the same experiment. Insets 1 and 2 highlight the deeper neuronal
layers receiving CTB-488. The images on the right show the magniﬁed regions of 1 and 2. Scale bars, 500 µm (left lower image, ii), 200 µm (upper left
(i), middle (i and ii) and right images (ii)). Representative images are given. N = 12 from four independent batches. Representative images, cell line
F14536.2. c, Experiment with dual-color CTB injection. Representative volume-rendered images of OV organoids injected with CTB-488 and CTB-647
at two different OVs of the same organoid. White arrowheads mark the site of injection. Reconstructed images of individual channels, as well as
merged channels, are shown on the right. Scale bars, 200 µm. N = 13 organoids from four independent batches. Cell line IMR-90. Panel a adapted with
permission from ref. 5, Elsevier.


1924 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 a C1, Cortical EN1
 C2, Radial glia 1
 C3, Radial glia 2
 C4, IP 2
 C5, GE
 C6, Cortical EN2
 C7, Diencephalon
 C8, Cycling cells
 C9, IP 1
 UMAP2


 C10, Microglia
 C11, Early eye
 C12, Müller glia
 UMAP1


 b

 Optic chiasm
 Contralateral
 Visual cortex


 Optic nerve
 Optic tract
 Ipsilateral
 RGC


 RGC


 LGN


 IP 1
 Cycling cells
 Radial glia 1
 Radial glia 2
 Microglia Fraction of cells
 Early eye
 in group (%)
 Muller glia
 IP 2
 Cortical EN1

 40
 60
 30
 50
 20
 10
 Cortical EN2
 GE Mean expression
 Diencephalon in group

 0 1
 CABP1
 NR2E1
 SHROOM2
 BMPER
 RGS4
 GJA1
 AIF1
 HEXB
 GAD2
 LHX9
 TCF7L2
 PCP4L1
 PLP1
 MBP
 FOXD1
 ISL1
 SLIT2
 EXT2
 EXTL3
 EPHB1
 EPHB2


 c Contralateral Ipsilateral
 Visual cortex, score RGC, score RGC, score LGN, score
 1.0
 4
 0.8 0.8 5
 3
 0.6 0.6 4
 UMAP2


 UMAP2


 UMAP2


 UMAP2


 0.4 0.4 2 3

 2
 0.2 0.2
 1
 1
 0 0
 0 0
 UMAP1 UMAP1 UMAP1 UMAP1

 Optic chiasm, score Optic tract, score Optic nerve, score
 1.5
 3
 1.5
 1.0
 2
 UMAP2


 UMAP2


 UMAP2


 1.0

 0.5
 1 0.5

 0 0
 0

 UMAP1 UMAP1 UMAP1

Fig. 6 | OVB organoids reveal visual pathway cell populations. a, Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) plot of cell cluster
distribution in OVB organoids. Individual cell clusters are color coded and labeled on the right. The UMAP plot is reproduced from the original paper5.
b, Dot plot showing mean expression in each group and the fraction of cells expressing sets of genes representing cells implicated in the visual
pathway. c, UMAPs showing the distribution of cells expressing various gene groups (from b) speciﬁc to each cell type in the human visual pathway.
Panel a adapted with permission from ref. 5, Elsevier.


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1925

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 intravitreal injection of conjugated CTB and followed its subsequent anterograde axonal transport in
 mice or rats54–56. In particular, CTB was initially introduced in 1977 as a retrograde neurotracer.
 However, CTB, like most neurotracers, is bidirectionally transported57. Another study by Conte
 et al.58 described a general application of conjugated CTB as a neuroanatomical tracer.
 While the optic tract-tracing method has been demonstrated in vivo in several studies using mice
 or rats, it has never been shown to trace the optic tract in vitro 3D tissues such as organoids.
 However, as shown in Fig. 5 and Supplementary Video 1, ﬂuorescently conjugated CTB is a useful
 tool to trace axonal projections from RGCs of the OVs upon light stimuli to identify optic tract-like
 structures within the OVB organoid in vitro.
 Microinjecting AlexaFluor488-CTB directly into one OV and AlexaFluor647-CTB into the other
 optic vesicle (Box 3) can be used to test whether OVs contain projection tracts into organoid tissues.
 To facilitate the imaging, organoids should ﬁrst be tissue cleared as previously described10,52. CTB
 should label retinal nerve ﬁber of axon bundles59–61. After 24 h, strong uptake of CTB into a retinal
 region with numerous axon-like projections should be seen (Fig. 5). Furthermore, 3D reconstruction
 of confocal slices revealed that the ﬁbers of the optic stalk-like structure connect the OVs to the brain.
 This similar anatomical organization is observed at 4 weeks of gestation. The inner wall of the optic
 stalk contains retinal nerve (optic nerve) ﬁbers62. These ﬁbers appear to converge, although they seem
 to emerge from two different OVs (Supplementary Video 1). Nonetheless, we cannot exclude if the
 observed converging phenomena is a biological process or an artifact due to tissue shrinkage induced
 by a tissue clearing.
 Technical aspects requiring further optimization. These observations raise the possibility that the
 bilateral OVs are connected to inner regions of brain organoids via axonal-like projections.
 Furthermore, to substantiate the presence of cell types that express genes related to the visual
 pathways comprising ipsilateral RGCs, contralateral RGCs, optic nerve, optic chiasm, optic tract,
 LGN and visual cortex, scRNA-seq data gathered from OVB organoids can be exploited (Supple-
 mentary Table 1). Genes representing these optic cell types should be expressed in OVB organoids.
 For example, hierarchical clustering and subsequent dot-plot quantiﬁcation reveal that cell types
 expressing optic nerve, optic chiasm and LGN genes are present within the cluster assigned as early
 eye and ganglionic eminence. Ipsilateral and contralateral RGCs fall into the Müller glia cluster. Both
 optic tract and visual cortex genes are broadly distributed in all cell clusters, suggesting that these
 regions are possibly not yet speciﬁed on the OVB organoids (Fig. 6). These analyses reveal that OVB
 organoids exhibit diverse cell types in the human visual pathway beside the early retina.
 Besides the anticipated results described here, one can expect numerous outcomes from these OVB
 organoids. For clarity, experimental outcomes for the following experiments are presented and dis-
 cussed in the main supporting paper5. The isolation of RPE cells (Box 4) allows culture and harvest
 for transplantation studies. scRNA transcriptomics (Box 5) and bulk RNA-seq (Box 6) can identify
 the presence of various cell types. Electron microscopy observations (Box 7) can be used to determine
 the lens, cornea, RPE cells, primary cilia and immature photoreceptor-like cells at the level of
 ultrastructure detail. Finally, measurements with ERG (Box 8) as described in the experimental
 manuscript5, can reveal the functional characteristic of light sensation. OVB organoids can respond to
 stimuli of different light intensities in a dose-dependent manner. This could easily be used as the
 ultimate readout for rescue experiments of patient-derived OVB organoids with blindness, in terms of
 functional restoration. Examples of the anticipated results of different experiments can be found in
 the supporting paper5.

 Data availability
 Source data are provided with the original paper5. Any other data are available from the corre-
 sponding author. The data presented here have not been published previously.

References
 1. Mariani, J. & Vaccarino, F. M. Breakthrough moments: Yoshiki Sasai’s discoveries in the third dimension.
 Cell Stem Cell 24, 837–838 (2019).
 2. Giandomenico, S. L., Sutcliffe, M. & Lancaster, M. A. Generation and long-term culture of advanced cerebral
 organoids for studying later stages of neural development. Nat. Protoc. 16, 579–602 (2021).
 3. Bergmann, S. et al. Blood-brain-barrier organoids for investigating the permeability of CNS therapeutics. Nat.
 Protoc. 13, 2827–2843 (2018).
 4. Gabriel, E. et al. CPAP promotes timely cilium disassembly to maintain neural progenitor pool. EMBO J. 35,
 803–819 (2016).

1926 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 5. Gabriel, E. et al. Human brain organoids assemble functionally integrated bilateral optic vesicles. Cell Stem
 Cell 28, 1740–1757.e8 (2021).
 6. Gopalakrishnan, J. The emergence of stem cell-based brain organoids: trends and challenges. BioEssays 41,
 e1900011 (2019).
 7. Ramani, A. et al. SARS-CoV-2 targets neurons of 3D human brain organoids. EMBO J. 39, e106230 (2020).
 8. Sloan, S. A., Andersen, J., Pașca, A. M., Birey, F. & Pașca, S. P. Generation and assembly of human brain
 region-speciﬁc three-dimensional cultures. Nat. Protoc. 13, 2062–2085 (2018).
 9. Quadrato, G. et al. Cell diversity and network dynamics in photosensitive human brain organoids. Nature
 545, 48–53 (2017).
 10. Goranci-Buzhala, G. et al. Rapid and efﬁcient invasion assay of glioblastoma in human brain organoids. Cell
 Rep. 31, 107738 (2020).
 11. Birey, F. et al. Assembly of functionally integrated human forebrain spheroids. Nature 545, 54–59 (2017).
 12. Huschke, E. Uber einige streitpunkte aus der anatomie des auges [German]. Z. Opthalmol. 4, 273–295 (1835).
 13. Pander, H. Beiträge zur Entwickelungsgeschichte des Hühnchens im Eye [German] (1817).
 14. Adelmann, H. Marcello Malpighi and the Evolution of Embryology Vol. 3 (Cornell Univ. Press, 1966).
 15. Zhong, X. et al. Generation of three-dimensional retinal tissue with functional photoreceptors from human
 iPSCs. Nat. Commun. 5, 4047 (2014).
 16. Capowski, E. E. et al. Reproducibility and staging of 3D human retinal organoids across multiple pluripotent
 stem cell lines. Development 146, dev171686 (2019).
 17. Nakano, T. et al. Self-formation of optic cups and storable stratiﬁed neural retina from human ESCs. Cell
 Stem Cell 10, 771–785 (2012).
 18. Cowan, C. S. et al. Cell types of the human retina and its organoids at single-cell resolution. Cell 182,
 1623–1640.e34 (2020).
 19. Vergara, M. N. et al. Three-dimensional automated reporter quantiﬁcation (3D-ARQ) technology enables
 quantitative screening in retinal organoids. Development 144, 3698–3705 (2017).
 20. Meyer, J. S. et al. Optic vesicle-like structures derived from human pluripotent stem cells facilitate a cus-
 tomized approach to retinal disease treatment. Stem Cells 29, 1206–1218 (2011).
 21. Eldred, K. C. et al. Thyroid hormone signaling speciﬁes cone subtypes in human retinal organoids. Science
 362, eaau6348 (2018).
 22. Eldred, K. C. & Reh, T. A. Human retinal model systems: strengths, weaknesses, and future directions. Dev.
 Biol. 480, 114–122 (2021).
 23. Fligor, C. M. et al. Extension of retinofugal projections in an assembled model of human pluripotent stem
 cell-derived organoids. Stem Cell Rep. 16, 2228–2241 (2021).
 24. Graw, J. Eye development. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 90, 343–386 (2010).
 25. Rao, R. C., Stern, J. H. & Temple, S. The eyeball’s connected to the brain ball. Cell Stem Cell 28, 1675–1677
 (2021).
 26. Fuhrmann, S. Eye morphogenesis and patterning of the optic vesicle. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 93, 61–84 (2010).
 27. Adler, R. & Canto-Soler, M. V. Molecular mechanisms of optic vesicle development: complexities, ambi-
 guities and controversies. Dev. Biol. 305, 1–13 (2007).
 28. Dupacova, N., Antosova, B., Paces, J. & Kozmik, Z. Meis homeobox genes control progenitor competence in
 the retina. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2013136118 (2021).
 29. Mann, I. C. The Development of the Human Eye 1st edn (Univ. Press, 1928).
 30. O’Rahilly, R. The early development of the eye in staged human embryos. Contrib. Embryol. 38, 1–42 (1966).
 31. O’Rahilly, R. The prenatal development of the human eye. Exp. Eye Res. 21, 93–112 (1975).
 32. Gabriel, E. & Gopalakrishnan, J. Generation of iPSC-derived human brain organoids to model early neu-
 rodevelopmental disorders. J. Vis. Exp. 14, 55372 (2017).
 33. Gabriel, E. et al. Recent zika virus isolates induce premature differentiation of neural progenitors in human
 brain organoids. Cell. Stem Cell. 20, 397–406.e5 (2017).
 34. Zhang, W. et al. Modeling microcephaly with cerebral organoids reveals a WDR62-CEP170-KIF2A pathway
 promoting cilium disassembly in neural progenitors. Nat. Commun. 10, 2612 (2019).
 35. Rosen, D. & Mahabadi, N. Embryology, Optic Cup (StatPearls Publishing LLC, updated 8 May 2022); https://
 www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK545150/
 36. Cvekl, A. & Wang, W. L. Retinoic acid signaling in mammalian eye development. Exp. Eye Res. 89, 280–291
 (2009).
 37. Janesick, A., Wu, S. C. & Blumberg, B. Retinoic acid signaling and neuronal differentiation. Cell. Mol. Life Sci.
 72, 1559–1576 (2015).
 38. Morizane, A., Doi, D., Kikuchi, T., Nishimura, K. & Takahashi, J. Small-molecule inhibitors of bone mor-
 phogenic protein and activin/nodal signals promote highly efﬁcient neural induction from human plur-
 ipotent stem cells. J. Neurosci. Res. 89, 117–126 (2011).
 39. Jin, M., Yuan, Q., Li, S. & Travis, G. H. Role of LRAT on the retinoid isomerase activity and membrane
 association of Rpe65. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 20915–20924 (2007).
 40. Hu, J. & Bok, D. The use of cultured human fetal retinal pigment epithelium in studies of the classical
 retinoid visual cycle and retinoid-based disease processes. Exp. Eye Res. 126, 46–50 (2014).
 41. Francis, P. J. Genetics of inherited retinal disease. J. R. Soc. Med. 99, 189–191 (2006).
 42. Takagi, S. et al. Evaluation of transplanted autologous induced pluripotent stem cell-derived retinal pigment
 epithelium in exudative age-related macular degeneration. Ophthalmol. Retin. 3, 850–859 (2019).


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1927

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 43. Dahl-Jensen, S. & Grapin-Botton, A. The physics of organoids: a biophysical approach to understanding
 organogenesis. Development 144, 946–951 (2017).
 44. He, Z. et al. Lineage recording in human cerebral organoids. Nat. Methods 19, 90–99 (2022).
 45. Hu, S. et al. Effects of cellular origin on differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived
 endothelial cells. JCI Insight 1, e85558 (2016).
 46. Phetfong, J. et al. Cell type of origin inﬂuences iPSC generation and differentiation to cells of the hema-
 toendothelial lineage. Cell Tissue Res. 365, 101–112 (2016).
 47. Bardy, C. et al. Neuronal medium that supports basic synaptic functions and activity of human neurons
 in vitro. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, E2725–E2734 (2015).
 48. Slembrouck-Brec, A. et al. Reprogramming of adult retinal Müller glial cells into human-induced pluripotent
 stem cells as an efﬁcient source of retinal cells. Stem Cells Int. 2019, 7858796 (2019).
 49. Karch, C. M. et al. A comprehensive resource for induced pluripotent stem cells from patients with primary
 tauopathies. Stem Cell Rep. 13, 939–955 (2019).
 50. Baharvand, H., Salekdeh, G. H., Taei, A. & Mollamohammadi, S. An efﬁcient and easy-to-use cryopre-
 servation protocol for human ES and iPS cells. Nat. Protoc. 5, 588–594 (2010).
 51. Rivera, T., Zhao, Y., Ni, Y. & Wang, J. Human-induced pluripotent stem cell culture methods under cGMP
 conditions. Curr. Protoc. Stem Cell Biol. 54, e117 (2020).
 52. Klingberg, A. et al. Fully automated evaluation of total glomerular number and capillary tuft size in nephritic
 kidneys using lightsheet microscopy. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 28, 452–459 (2017).
 53. Maiorano, N. A. & Hindges, R. Restricted perinatal retinal degeneration induces retina reshaping and
 correlated structural rearrangement of the retinotopic map. Nat. Commun. 4, 1938 (2013).
 54. Crish, S. D., Sappington, R. M., Inman, D. M., Horner, P. J. & Calkins, D. J. Distal axonopathy with structural
 persistence in glaucomatous neurodegeneration. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 5196–5201 (2010).
 55. Foxton, R., Osborne, A., Martin, K. R., Ng, Y. S. & Shima, D. T. Distal retinal ganglion cell axon transport loss
 and activation of p38 MAPK stress pathway following VEGF-A antagonism. Cell Death Dis. 7, e2212 (2016).
 56. Hou, M. et al. Age-related visual impairments and retinal ganglion cells axonal degeneration in a mouse
 model harboring OPTN (E50K) mutation. Cell Death Dis. 13, 362 (2022).
 57. Stoeckel, K., Schwab, M. & Thoenen, H. Role of gangliosides in the uptake and retrograde axonal transport of
 cholera and tetanus toxin as compared to nerve growth factor and wheat germ agglutinin. Brain Res. 132,
 273–285 (1977).
 58. Conte, W. L., Kamishina, H. & Reep, R. L. Multiple neuroanatomical tract-tracing using ﬂuorescent alexa
 ﬂuor conjugates of cholera toxin subunit B in rats. Nat. Protoc. 4, 1157–1166 (2009).
 59. Huberman, A. D., Dehay, C., Berland, M., Chalupa, L. M. & Kennedy, H. Early and rapid targeting of eye-
 speciﬁc axonal projections to the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus in the fetal macaque. J. Neurosci. 25,
 4014–4023 (2005).
 60. Mikkelsen, J. D. Visualization of efferent retinal projections by immunohistochemical identiﬁcation of
 cholera toxin subunit B. Brain Res. Bull. 28, 619–623 (1992).
 61. Yao, F. et al. Did you choose appropriate tracer for retrograde tracing of retinal ganglion cells? The dif-
 ferences between cholera toxin subunit B and ﬂuorogold. PLoS ONE 13, e0205133 (2018).
 62. Chen, Y. et al. Cited2 is required for the proper formation of the hyaloid vasculature and for lens mor-
 phogenesis. Development 135, 2939–2948 (2008).
 63. Eiraku, M. & Sasai, Y. Self-formation of layered neural structures in three-dimensional culture of ES cells.
 Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 22, 768–777 (2012).
 64. Parﬁtt, D. A. et al. Identiﬁcation and correction of mechanisms underlying inherited blindness in human
 iPSC-derived optic cups. Cell Stem Cell 18, 769–781 (2016).
 65. Susaimanickam, P. J. et al. Generating minicorneal organoids from human induced pluripotent stem cells.
 Development 144, 2338–2351 (2017).
 66. Foster, J. W. et al. Cornea organoids from human induced pluripotent stem cells. Sci. Rep. 7, 41286 (2017).
 67. Hallam, D. et al. Human-induced pluripotent stem cells generate light responsive retinal organoids with
 variable and nutrient-dependent efﬁciency. Stem Cells 36, 1535–1551 (2018).
 68. Kim, S. et al. Generation, transcriptome proﬁling, and functional validation of cone-rich human retinal
 organoids. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116, 10824–10833 (2019).
 69. Zerti, D. et al. IGFBPs mediate IGF-1’s functions in retinal lamination and photoreceptor development
 during pluripotent stem cell differentiation to retinal organoids. Stem Cells 39, 458–466 (2021).
 70. Kuwahara, A. et al. Generation of a ciliary margin-like stem cell niche from self-organizing human retinal
 tissue. Nat. Commun. 6, 6286 (2015).
 71. Reichman, S. et al. Generation of storable retinal organoids and retinal pigmented epithelium from adherent
 human ips cells in xeno-free and feeder-free conditions. Stem Cells 35, 1176–1188 (2017).
 72. Gagliardi, G. et al. Characterization and transplantation of CD73-positive photoreceptors isolated from
 human iPSC-derived retinal organoids. Stem Cell Rep. 11, 665–680 (2018).
 73. Sullivan-Brown, J., Bisher, M. E. & Burdine, R. D. Embedding, serial sectioning and staining of zebraﬁsh
 embryos using JB-4 resin. Nat. Protoc. 6, 46–55 (2011).
 74. Gu, L., Cong, J., Zhang, J., Tian, Y. Y. & Zhai, X. Y. A microwave antigen retrieval method using two heating
 steps for enhanced immunostaining on aldehyde-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded tissue sections. Histochem. Cell
 Biol. 145, 675–680 (2016).
 75. Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21 (2013).


1928 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 76. Liao, Y., Smyth, G. K. & Shi, W. featureCounts: an efﬁcient general purpose program for assigning sequence
 reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics 30, 923–930 (2014).
 77. Risso, D., Ngai, J., Speed, T. P. & Dudoit, S. Normalization of RNA-seq data using factor analysis of control
 genes or samples. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 896–902 (2014).
 78. Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data
 with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550 (2014).
 79. Bodenhofer, U., Kothmeier, A. & Hochreiter, S. APCluster: an R package for afﬁnity propagation clustering.
 Bioinformatics 27, 2463–2464 (2011).
 80. Liberzon, A. et al. Molecular signatures database (MSigDB) 3.0. Bioinformatics 27, 1739–1740 (2011).
 81. Albanna, W. et al. Electroretinographic assessment of inner retinal signaling in the isolated and superfused
 murine retina. Curr. Eye Res. 42, 1518–1526 (2017).

 Acknowledgements
 This study was supported by the SPP2127-GO 2301/5-2 ‘Gene and Cell-Based Therapies to Counteract Neuroretinal Degeneration’ (J.G.
 and E.G.) and by the Fritz Thyssen Stiftung (E.G). V.B. acknowledges support by the Volkswagen Foundation (Freigeist—A110720) and
 the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft SPP2127-BU 2974/4-1, EXC-2151-390873048-Cluster of Excellence—ImmunoSensation2 at the
 University of Bonn.


 Author contributions
 J.G. and E.G.: conception and protocol design. The rest of the authors have contributed their expertise in the respective methods of the
 protocol. E.G.: organoid generation and characterization; G.P. and V.B.: scRNA-seq analysis; W.A. and T.S.: ERGs; A.P. and N.J.: RNA-
 seq analyses; A.R. and A.M.: 3D imaging; M.G.R. and G.C.: TEM and analysis; O.G.: iPSCs, organoids and data analysis; C.M.K.: iPSC
 lines and data analysis.


 Competing interests
 The authors declare no competing interests.


 Additional information
 Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-023-00814-x.
 Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Jay Gopalakrishnan.
 Peer review information Nature Protocols thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
 Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
 Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
 Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the
 author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of
 such publishing agreement and applicable law.


 Received: 11 January 2022; Accepted: 13 January 2023;
 Published online: 17 May 2023


 Related links
 Key references using the protocol
 Gabriel, E. et al. EMBO J. 35, 803–819 (2016): https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.201593679
 Gabriel, E. et al. Cell Stem Cell 20, 397–406.e5 (2017): https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2016.12.005
 Gabriel, E. et al. Cell Stem Cell 28, 1740–1757.e8 (2021): https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2021.07.010


NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot 1929
