Protocol


Introduction

Organoids and assembloids derived from human induced pluripotent stem (hiPS) cells
model various aspects of nervous system development and function and can be used to study
neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders1–4. For instance, we developed human
forebrain assembloids5 (hFA) by integrating human cortical organoids (hCO), representing
the cerebral cortex, with human subpallial organoids (hSO), mimicking the ventral forebrain
(Fig. 1), which can be used to study cortical interneuron migration and circuit integration5–7. This
preparation mirrors the cellular behavior of neurons in the fetal forebrain5,8. Using this system,
we investigated Timothy syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutations
in the CaV1.2 calcium channel and discovered that interneurons in mutant assembloids
exhibit abnormal migratory saltations5. Further molecular analyses revealed the underlying
mechanisms driving these migration defects8. Importantly, we also leveraged this platform to
identify and test the efficacy of an antisense oligonucleotide designed to correct the aberrant
exon usage caused by the mutation, successfully mitigating interneuron migration defects9.

Development of the protocol
Abnormalities in the development and function of cortical γ-aminobutyric acid–releasing
interneurons are increasingly recognized as contributing factors to autism spectrum disorder
and other neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs)10,11. This connection is supported by the high
prevalence of seizures and epilepsy in individuals with autism spectrum disorder and by genetic
studies that have identified numerous NDD-associated genes related to inhibitory signaling,
including multiple γ-aminobutyric acid receptor subunits12,13. Despite these findings, linking
specific genetic mutations to distinct phases of the extended process of human forebrain
development remains challenging.
 Pooled CRISPR–Cas9 genetic screening provides a powerful, high-throughput
approach to systematically study the functions of a group of genes in complex biological
processes14,15. Although this approach has been applied with neural organoids to study early
neural differentiation, its use in investigating more complex developmental events, such as
interneuron differentiation and migration, had not been demonstrated. In particular, it had


a Fig. 1 | Generation of hiPS cell–derived hCO and hSO to model forebrain
 Dorsal forebrain development. a, Coronal section schematic of the gestational week (GW)
 (pallium, hCO) 18–20 human brain, illustrating the dorsal (pallial) and ventral (subpallial)
 forebrain. b, A schematic showing differentiation of hiPS cells into organoids
 Ventral forebrain
 (subpallium, hSO) modeling specific brain regions and the generation of hFA. c, Timeline for the
 neural induction and patterning to generate hCO and hSO. BDNF, brain-derived
 GW 18–20 neurotrophic factor; d, day; DM, dorsomorphin; SAG, smoothened agonist;
b SB, SB-431542; XAV, XAV-939. Panel a adapted with permission from ref. 33,
 Springer Nature.

 hCO

 Guidance
 hFA
 hiPS cells Aggregation


 hSO
c
 d1 d7 d26 d47
hCO
 DM, SB EGF, FGF2 BDNF, NT3

 d1 d7 d13 d26 d47
hSO
 DM,SB, XAV EGF, FGF2, XAV BDNF, NT3
 SAG


Nature Protocols 2
