4 Thaw an appropriate number of Matrigel aliquots in a 4 °C fridge (1.2 ml Matrigel is required for a full 24-well plate of organoids droplets).
CRITICAL Matrigel needs to be thawed before Step 11.
c
5 Prepare base medium, colon organoid growth medium and washing medium as described...
7 Bring the cryovial into the biosafety cabinet after spaying the outer surface with 70% ethanol.
8 Add 1 ml of washing medium to the cryovial, resuspend the organoids gently and then transfer the content of the cryotube to the 15 mL conical tube that already contains 10 ml of washing medium. Fill the tube with additional washing medium up to 15 ml.
9 Centrifuge at 500g for 5 min at 4 °C. During centrifugation, prepare the material for the subsequent steps: sterilize a glass dish with PREempt disinfectant solution and 70% ethanol. Add ice to 50–70% capacity of the glass dish, spray with 70% ethanol again and place the dish into the biosafety cabinet. Put Matrigel aliquots into the aluminum cooling block. Spray thoroughly with 70% ethanol, and place gently into the glass dish containing ice.
CRITICAL Ice is not sterile; use with extra caution in the biosafety cabinet.
c
10 After centrifugation, aspirate the supernatant (washing medium) with vacuum using a sterile Pasteur pipette.
11 Resuspend the organoid pellet with 1.2 ml of Matrigel and seed 50 µl droplets into each well of an Olympus 24-well, tissue culture treated plate.
CRITICAL It is important to use Olympus 24-well tissue culture treated plates as they keep the Matrigel droplets spherical, which is critical for 3D organoid growth.
12 Carefully transfer the plate(s) containing Matrigel droplets to the CO2 incubator. Incubate for 15–20 min to allow Matrigel gelation. After 15–20 min, check the Matrigel gelation by tilting the plates. If the Matrigel holds ﬁrm, they should be ready.
13 Place the plate(s) inside the biosafety cabinet and add 600 µl of colon organoid medium to each well. Carefully dispense the medium into the side of the well to avoid disturbing the Matrigel droplet.
