65. At the end of phase III (day 21), iNPC-derived nephron organoids are ready for characterization: follow option A for immunofluorescence staining and option B to prepare samples for RT-qPCR.
(A) Immunofluorescence staining
(i) To prepare samples for immunostaining, remove the Transwell insert from the six-well plate and peel the whole Transwell membrane off by using fine forceps (organoids should stay on the top of the membrane).
(ii) Use a blade or fine scissors to cut the Transwell membrane into smaller pieces (~5 mm), with each piece containing one organoid in the center.
(iii) Use forceps to transfer each Transwell membrane piece with an organoid into one 1.5-ml Eppendorf tube containing 200 µl of 10% (vol/vol) FBS medium.
▲ CRITICAL STEP It is important to use a solution containing FBS to transfer the organoids. When basal medium without FBS or PBS is used, organoids can stick to the Eppendorf tube, leading to loss of samples.
(iv) Aspirate the 10% (vol/vol) FBS medium and add 200 µl of 4% PFA (wt/vol) for fixation at room temperature for 12 min.
(v) Aspirate the 4% PFA and wash the organoid with 500 µl of PBS three times.
(vi) Aspirate the PBS after the last wash. Add 500 µl of blocking buffer and incubate for 30 min at room temperature.
(vii) Aspirate the blocking buffer and add 200 µl of blocking buffer containing the desired primary antibodies for incubation overnight at 4 °C. Information on our commonly used and validated antibodies for nephron organoid characterization and their dilution ratios is listed in Table 2.
(viii) Aspirate the primary antibody solution and add 500 µl of PBST to wash the well three times.
(ix) Aspirate the PBST after the last wash and add 200 µl of blocking buffer containing the desired secondary antibodies for incubation overnight at 4 °C.
(x) Aspirate the secondary antibody solution and then wash the well with 500 µl of PBST three to five times.
(xi) Use forceps to hold the Transwell membrane piece and transfer the piece with an organoid onto a microscope slide.
(xii) Remove excessive PBST and then add ~20 µl of mounting medium.
(xiii) Carefully place a microscope coverslip on the sample (avoid bubble formation). Note, the coverslip may flatten the organoid, but it will not compromise its 3D structure.
(xiv) Seal the sample with clear nail polish surrounding the coverslip. The sample is now ready for imaging by using epifluorescence microscopy or confocal microscopy.
iNPC-derived nephron organoids should display NPHS1+/NPHS2+/PODXL+/MAFB+ podocytes, LTL+/LRP2+/HNF4A+ proximal tubules, SLC12A1+ loops of Henle and POU3F3+/CDH1+ distal nephrons.
