1. Day 0. incubate a Matrigel-coated 12-well plate (1 ml per well) at 37 °C for ≥1 h before use.
2. Confirm that hPSCs have reached a confluency of 75–90%.
◆ TROUBLESHOOTING
▲ CAUTION When working with multiple cell lines at the same time, it is very important not to misidentify the different cell lines and to avoid the possibility of cross-contaminating.
3. Aspirate the mTeSR Plus culture medium and wash the cells with 1 ml of room temperature PBS. After aspirating the PBS, add 500 µl of pre-warmed Versene solution (or room temperature 0.5 mM EDTA) and incubate at 37 °C in an incubator for 5–6 min.
4. After the incubation time is up, carefully observe the cell morphology under the microscope. Expect to see the light penetrating through the condense regions of the cells.
5. Once most of the well is bright, carefully aspirate the dissociation medium.
6. Using a P1000 pipette, use 1 ml of mTeSR Plus medium to gently detach the cells and break up hPSC colonies to small clusters. Then, transfer the cells to a 1.7-ml Eppendorf tube.
▲ CAUTION Gently pipette no more than five times, because the mechanical stress can induce spontaneous differentiation. It is normal to have clusters of cells with different sizes, which will not affect hPSC expansion.
7. In a new 1.7-ml Eppendorf tube, prepare 1 ml of mTeSR Plus for one well of a 12-well plate. Seed the cells at a 1:12 ratio to the newly prepared mTeSR.
8. Aspirate the Matrigel-coating medium from the well and add your passaged cells in mTeSR Plus to the well. Return to the incubator.
▲ CRITICAL STEP Once the cells have been plated, gently jolt the plate up and down and left and right to equally distribute the cells in each well.
9. Days 2–5. Starting on day 2 (where day 0 is the day of cell seeding in Step 8), change the medium every other day with fresh mTeSR Plus medium (no medium change is needed on day 1). Healthy hPSCs will reach a confluency of 80–90% 4–5 d after passage. This suggests that their cell proliferation rates are following the normal logarithmic growth. In addition, this indicates that the cells are ready to proceed for NPC differentiation.
