Protocol


 BOX 1
 Generation of CRISPR–Cas9-engineered stem cells
 We followed a previously reported protocol for genome engineering Primer 5R (GGGAGCAAAAAGGAAACCTC) (Fig. 6a,b). Sequence PCR
 using the CRISPR–Cas9 system98, with some modifications to amplicons using the MiSeq Sequencing System (Illumina) or another
 introduce a complete hemizygous SHANK3 deletion (~69.5 kb) in the next-generation sequencing platform. Determine the cutting
 human H9 stem cell line (Fig. 6). The detailed step-by-step process is efficiency by the highest mutation frequency at the target loci. The
 as follows: efficiency was ~24.9% for sgRNA#1 and 20.1% for sgRNA#4 (Fig. 6c)
 • sgRNA design: use an online CRISPR design tool to identify single • Electroporation into stem cells: dissociate human stem cells into
 guide RNA (sgRNA) sequences targeting the 5′ and 3′ regions of single cells by Accutase treatment for 5–15 min. Resuspend cells
 SHANK3. Tools include CHOPCHOP (http://chopchop.cbu.uib. in stem cell medium with ROCK inhibitor and electroporate with
 no), Benchlin (https://www.benchling.com/crispr) and CRISPick 5 μM of validated sgRNA-containing plasmids per 3 × 106 cells
 (https://portals.broadinstitute.org/gppx/crispick/public). We used using the Amaxa Nucleofector System (program A023). Plate cells
 crispr.mit.edu (currently unavailable) to identify sgRNA sequences onto MG-coated plates post-electroporation (Fig. 6d)
 flanking SHANK3: sgRNA#1R (ATACCACAAGAAGGACGTCCGGG), • Selection of transfected cells: change the medium to puromycin-
 sgRNA#2F (ACCCTTAAACACGGTTATGATGG), sgRNA#3R (ATTT containing (0.25 μg/mL) stem cell medium the following day to
 AAAAGCAACCGGACGCTGG), sgRNA#4F (TGAGCCGCTATGA select transfected cells expressing the puromycin resistance
 CGCTTCAGGG), sgRNA#7 (AGAGGTGTGCGTTCAGTTACAGG), cassette. After 48 h in puromycin-containing medium, manually
 and sgRNA#9F (TCTGGGCGTCTGACACGTCAGGG) (Fig. 6a). isolate and expand antibiotic-resistant single stem cell colonies
 The tools also provide information regarding oligos, primers and on MG-coated plates
 predicted off-target sites for sgRNA constructs • Screening colonies: when stem cell colonies reach 60–80%
 • sgRNA synthesis and cloning: synthesize DNA fragments and confluency, passage them and use half of the cells for gDNA
 subclone them into the plasmid pSpCas9(BB)-2A-Puro (PX459, extraction and half for cryopreservation and propagation.
 Addgene cat. no. 48139) following standard procedures98 Perform PCR on extracted gDNA using primers targeting the
 • Cutting efficiency assessment: transfect HEK293 cells region of interest. For SHANK3, we screened a total of 64 single
 with each sgRNA plasmid using standard transfection colonies using two pairs of forward and reverse primers (Fig. 6e).
 procedures98 to assess the Cas9 cutting efficiency. At 72 h Of the 64 colonies screened, 4 were identified with a complete
 post-transfection, extract genomic DNA (gDNA) and perform hemizygous SHANK3 deletion
 PCR with primers targeting the region of interest for next- • Sequencing validation: expand selected clones with correct
 generation sequencing. We used the following primers for deletions, extract gDNA and validate the deletion by PCR and
 SHANK3: Primer 1F (CAGACACTTCACGAAAGAAGC) and Sanger sequencing


Stage 2: neural induction (Steps 22–24)
We start neural induction with PS cells that achieved 80–90% confluency (Fig. 2a). Then, cells
are replated at 1:1 ratio onto MG-coated plates (Fig. 2b). To initiate the induction, we change the
stem cell medium to the induction medium on the next day after replating (Fig. 1). The duration
of neural induction is line dependent, spanning 5–10 d. The variability in the duration of neural
induction could be due to the variable expression levels of BMP and TGF-β receptors in different
human PS cell lines88. We stop neural induction and transition to the next step when we observe
tissue thickening due to cell layering, as well as tissue curling and detachments (Fig. 2c), which
are the hallmarks of successful acquisition of neuroectodermal fate. It is critical to assess daily
the progression of neural induction and remove floating dead cells during medium changes.
We normally do this by tilting the culture dish ~30° and aspirating 80–90% of old medium
containing any floating cells.

Stage 3: NR formation and isolation (Steps 25–43)
The successfully induced cultures are replated using Dispase, which allows the detachment
of neuroectodermal cell clusters. The clusters of neuroectodermal cells give rise to NRs.
Upon replating, we switch to the amplification medium with EGF (10 ng/mL) and FGF2
(10 ng/mL). Half the medium is exchanged every other day with fresh medium containing
2× EGF (20 ng/mL) and 2× FGF2 (20 ng/mL) to maintain the final concentration at 10 ng/mL.
We limit FGF2 exposure to 5 d (two medium changes) to avoid potential tissue caudalization50.
We continue including EGF until NRs become apparent. We use glass Pasteur pipettes bent

Nature Protocols | Volume 21 | February 2026 | 718–748 726
