Protocol

 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Stage 5

 iPS cell maintenance Amplification and Organoid formation from isolated Maturation of SNR-
 Neural induction
 and propagation NR formation SNR derived organoids

 Timing Day 0 Day 5–10 Day 16–21 (2 weeks) ~Month 1 Month 4 Month 5

 Start Dispase Manual SNR Manual MG Treatment with
 Induction replating isolation embedding trophic factors
 Media

 Essential 8/StemFlex DMEM/F12 and neurobasal with N2 and B27 (with vitamin A) supplements, respectively

 Morphogens/inhibitors/trophic factors added to media
 Dorsomorphin 4 µM; FGF 10 ng/mL (4 d); BDNF, NT3
 FGF 10 ng/mL; EGF 10 ng/mL
 SB431542 10 µM EGF 10 ng/mL GDNF
 Substrates

 MG-coated plates In suspension on orbital shaker In MG on orbital shaker

organoids from stem cell-derived SNRs. The protocol consists of five stages, Clearly defined SNRs, at least 200 µm in size, are isolated for propagation in
detailed in the text. Each stage varies in duration and utilizes different media, a 96-well plate (one SNR per well) on an orbital shaker in the amplification
morphogens, inhibitors, trophic factors, and substrates. In brief, validated medium (Stage 4). Organoids that demonstrate consistent growth and a clearly
and characterized human PS cells are used for differentiation (Stage 1). Neural visible single lumen are embedded in MG and propagated on the orbital shaker
induction begins when PS cells reach 100% confluency, the day after replating, for another 4 months in the organoid propagation medium (between 1 and
using the neural induction medium (Stage 2). The induced tissue is dissociated 4 months) and organoid maturation medium (between 4 and 5 months) (Stage 5).
into clumps and replated at lower density to promote the specification and

(inner) sides during the cell cycle and divide at the apical side61. In addition, early NR cells are
plastic and their differentiation can be directed toward different regional cell fates using a
specific set of morphogens46,50. Most PS cell-derived NRs emerge in clusters of multiple rosettes
(Fig. 2d). Therefore, we manually isolate SNRs that are ~200–300 μm in diameter for organoid
generation (Fig. 2f). Cells in SNRs are characterized by the expression of the proliferation
markers pH3 and KI67, neural progenitor markers SOX2 and NESTIN, and telencephalic markers
PAX6 and FOXG143, suggesting telencephalic identity. We noted that smaller SNRs (<150 μm in
diameter) often fail to transform into organoids and grow in suspension culture.

SNR-derived organoids
We transfer isolated SNRs to a low-adhesion 96-well plate (one SNR per well) and maintain
them on an orbital shaker in the N2/B27(with vitamin A) media with FGF2 and EGF for 2 weeks
(Figs. 1 and 3). We empirically determined that one SNR per well is required to prevent their
fusion and that FGF2 is essential for supporting organoid growth. During this time, the majority
of SNRs grow in size, reaching 400–700 μm in diameter by the end of 2 weeks, and transform
into organoids with a singular lumen (Fig. 3). We observed no correlation between the size of
each organoid and the number of lumens (Figs. 3 and 4). However, we noticed that SNR-derived
