Procedure
 1 Fix the required number of OVB organoids by immersing them in 3–4 ml of 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 1.8% sucrose in PBS (pH 7.2), overnight at 4 °C
 CRITICAL STEP Ensure pH is adjusted to 7.2 to diminish ﬁxation artifacts.
 c


 2 Rinse the samples ﬁve times in 5 ml of PBS (15 min each).
 CRITICAL STEP This washing step is critical to remove all traces of ﬁxative, as glutaraldehyde and osmium tetroxide (to be used in the next
 c


 step) form an intermediate compound that can break down to osmium black, a precipitate that can compromise the quality of the sample.
 3 Wash the samples twice in distilled water and post-ﬁx in 1% aqueous solution of osmium tetroxide for 1–2 h at 4 °C.
 CRITICAL STEP Avoid longer exposures to osmium tetroxide as this may extract cytoplasmic components.
 c


 4 Dehydrate the OVB organoids in a graded series of EtOH (50%, 75%, 95% and absolute), incubating them two times, 15 min each.
 5 After dehydration, incubate the samples for 15 min in 5 ml of the intermediate solvent propylene oxide since EtOH and the embedding medium
 are not fully miscible.
 6 First, incubate the organoids in 5 ml of a mixture of propylene oxide and embedding resin (Epon-Araldite) (propylene oxide 2:1 resin) for
 30 min at RT.
 7 Agitate the samples very slowly on a wheel rotator and then put overnight at 4 °C in 5 ml of a mixture of propylene oxide and resin 1:1.
 8 Transfer the samples in a pure embedding resin overnight at 4 °C.
 9 Transfer the organoids to ﬂat embedding molds from the embedding medium and properly orient to maximize cutting the desired area.
 10 Leave to polymerize for 48 h at 60–62 °C, and then cut the block with a razor blade to remove the resin around the sample and create a small
 trapezoidal block.
 11 Perform ultrathin sections of uniform thickness of 400–500 nm using a Reichert ultramicrotome and collect the sections on a single hole
 formvar-coated copper grids for observing serial sections.
 12 To counter stain the sections, transfer the grids into a 2% (wt/vol) uranyl acetate drop in a 70% methanol solution for 7 min or 2% uranyl
 acetate in distilled water for 20 min. However, methanol has been shown to enhance the contrast given by uranyl acetate.
 13 Wash the grids in four drops of 70% methanol followed by ﬁve drops of distilled water.
 14 Transfer the grids to a drop of Reynold’s lead citrate for 2–3 min.
 15 Wash the grids in ﬁve drops of distilled water and dry at RT.
 16 One can perform observations on aTEM. In our case, we used a Tecnai G2 Spirit EM (FEI) equipped with a Morada CCD camera (Olympus).


 utilized to harvest cells or cell complexes for autologous transplantation and cell replacement therapy,
 if cultured under clinical-grade standards and tested for safety regarding tumorigenesis and
 immunity.

 Comparison with other methods
 In contrast to previous protocols that generated either 3D brain organoids or retinal organoids, our
 protocol allows generating both domains within a single organoid. Although some brain organoid
 culturing methods have allowed pigmented areas to form, these mainly were randomly placed or
 scattered across brain organoid surfaces9. This ﬁnding has contributed to the assumption that brain
 organoids are chaotic tissues lacking the self-patterning rules that in vivo systems have43. On
 the other hand, pure retinal organoids assemble pigment-rich OV-like structures protruding from the
 primary tissue. These structures are excised and cultured under a deﬁned condition for several weeks.
 Remarkably, these organoids lack forebrain tissues and do not form in vivo-like OVs, layered RPEs or
 properly positioned photoreceptors16. Thus, so far, no brain organoid culturing method has been
 described to develop bilaterally symmetric optical vesicles or cups. Table 1 compares several different
 methods for generating human optic cup and vesicle-like structures in 3D (including various retinal
 organoids and OVB organoids), detailing which kind of assays/experiments have been used to test
 their characteristics, while Table 2 compares OVB organoids with some of the selected aspects of the
 retinal organoids.
 Below, we summarize the pros and cons of OVB organoids compared with other methods for
 generating organoids containing retina-like structures.

1900 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 18 | JUNE 2023 | 1893–1929 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 Box 8 | Preparation of OVB organoids for ERGs ● Timing 2 d
