Protocol


Introduction

Several protocols have been established for the directed differentiation of human pluripotent
stem cells (hPSCs) to kidney tissue, generating organoids with segmented nephrons surrounded
by stroma and endothelium1–5. However, in all instances, nephron patterning remains immature.
The immaturity of the proximal tubule (PT) is particularly problematic given the unique role of
this structure in nephron reabsorption and secretion, and thus overall kidney functionality. This
immaturity critically limits the potential usefulness of kidney organoids for applications such as
drug development and toxicology research, as well as studies of PT dysfunction and disease. In
this Protocol, we describe in detail our recently published methodology for generating kidney
organoids with enhanced PTs (PT-enhanced kidney organoids)6.

Development of the protocol
The PT-enhanced organoid protocol builds on our earlier methods for generating hPSC-derived
kidney organoids, which have transitioned from hPSC maintenance using mouse embryonic
feeder layers to the use of feeder-free hPSC culture conditions, utilizing either APEL or
TeSR-E6 medium to support subsequent differentiation4,7–10. However, there are several
differences between these original methods and the PT-enhanced organoid protocol with
respect to the duration of the metanephric nephron progenitor specification phase and the
maintenance of this population before three-dimensional (3D) micromass generation6. While
our original Takasato protocol generates 3D kidney organoids from an intermediate mesoderm
population at day 7 of monolayer differentiation, prolonged differentiation and suppression of
precocious epithelialization in the current protocol favors improved metanephric progenitor
identity and proximal patterning of the resulting organoids.
 The PT-enhanced kidney organoid protocol possesses specific adaptions to the stepwise
differentiation phases to primitive streak and intermediate mesoderm that influence the
resulting metanephric identity of the progenitors. In the initial stages of the PT-enhanced
protocol, similar to the Takasato method9,10, hPSCs—embryonic stem cells (ESCs) or induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)—cultured in two-dimensional monolayer conditions of carefully
controlled cell density are initially induced with canonical WNT signaling to form primitive
streak. To encourage a metanephric identity, posteriorization of the primitive streak is
promoted by prolonging the duration of canonical WNT induction to 5 d before the addition
of FGF9, known to encourage robust posterior intermediate mesoderm formation3,4,9 (Fig. 1a).
The subsequent monolayer differentiation phase is then extended beyond day 10 (with
day 13 determined to be optimal6) with the introduction of nephron progenitor supportive
medium (CDBLY2; modified from CDBLY11) to better emulate the complex morphogen signaling
environment and timing of metanephric kidney development12–16, as well as the appearance of
SIX2-expressing progenitors during kidney organoid differentiation7.
 The provision of CDBLY2 at day 8 of monolayer differentiation prolongs FGF9 exposure
while simultaneously maintaining low-level canonical WNT, BMP and NOTCH signaling to
support nephron progenitor self-renewal11,17–20, assisting nephron progenitor commitment,
nephron patterning and maturation21–23. As a result, CDBLY2 not only supports and expands
the progenitors, but also prevents spontaneous epithelialization of the monolayer, prolonging
the progenitor specification phase of the differentiation compared with standard organoid
protocols6.
 Monolayer cells are aggregated on day 13 of differentiation, when the culture contains
predominantly committed and primed progenitors, intermediate mesoderm and metanephric
mesenchyme6, and transferred to a Transwell membrane for air–medium interface culture
in a 3D format (Fig. 1a,b). Following 14 d of culture in TesR-E6 basal medium, with an initial
5 d exposure to FGF9, the resulting PT-enhanced organoids possess more mature PTs
compared with those derived from a range of standard organoid protocols, with improved
transporter expression and evidence of S1/S2/S3 PT segmentation. The higher levels of
nephron functionality also translate to a more detectable PT damage response following
nephrotoxic insult and an improved ability to model severe acute respiratory syndrome

Nature Protocols | Volume 18 | November 2023 | 3229–3252 3230
