PROTOCOL
 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-021-00562-w


 Coculture of primary human colon monolayer
 with human gut bacteria
 Jianbo Zhang 1, Victor Hernandez-Gordillo 1, Martin Trapecar1, Charles Wright1,
 Mao Taketani1, Kirsten Schneider1, Wen Li Kelly Chen1, Eric Stas2, David T. Breault 2,3,4
 ,
 Rebecca L. Carrier5, Christopher A. Voigt1 and Linda G. Grifﬁth1,6 ✉
 The presence of microbes in the colon impacts host physiology. Therefore, microbes are being evaluated as potential
 treatments for colorectal diseases. Humanized model systems that enable robust culture of primary human intestinal
 cells with bacteria facilitate evaluation of potential treatments. Here, we describe a protocol that can be used to coculture
 a primary human colon monolayer with aerotolerant bacteria. Primary human colon cells maintained as organoids are
 dispersed into single-cell suspensions and then seeded on collagen-coated Transwell inserts, where they attach
 and proliferate to form conﬂuent monolayers within days of seeding. The conﬂuent monolayers are differentiated for an
 additional 4 d and then cocultured with bacteria. As an example application, we describe how to coculture differentiated
 colon cells for 8 h with four strains of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, each engineered to detect different colonic
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;


 microenvironments via genetically embedded logic circuits incorporating deoxycholic acid and anhydrotetracycline
 sensors. Characterization of this coculture system reveals that barrier function remains intact in the presence
 of engineered B. thetaiotaomicron. The bacteria stay close to the mucus layer and respond in a microenvironment-
 speciﬁc manner to the inducers (deoxycholic acid and anhydrotetracycline) of the genetic circuits. This protocol thus
 provides a useful mucosal barrier system to assess the effects of bacterial cells that respond to the colonic
 microenvironment, and may also be useful in other contexts to model human intestinal barrier properties and
 microbiota–host interactions.


 Introduction
 Genetically engineered and unmodiﬁed microbes have great potential to treat chronic diseases
 by impacting host physiology. Comprehensive evaluation of the performance of these potentially
 therapeutic microbes is critical and requires both in vitro and in vivo models. The US Food and Drug
 Administration supports the use of gut simulators to provide evidence for a claimed beneﬁcial
 bacterial effect, e.g., Simulator of the Human Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem (SHIME)1–4. These
 luminal microbial culture systems provide reproducible experiments, however, lack critical compo-
 nents of host–microbe interactions involving bacterial adhesion to, or entrainment in, epithelial-
 associated mucus; direct attachment to epithelial cells; and reaction to epithelial-secreted signaling
 molecules. To study the communication of bacteria with host mucosal barrier cells and evaluate
 attachment to cells and/or cell-produced mucus, various in vitro gut models have been developed.
 These gut models use either immortalized human cancer cell lines or primary cells expanded as
 organoids, in static cultures or continuous microﬂuidic systems5–8, and have proved useful to
 study drug transport and drug delivery6–9.
 In this protocol, we describe how to generate primary human colon monolayers in a standard
 cell culture membrane insert (Transwell) using colon proliferative cells previously maintained as
 organoids (Fig. 1). We provide detailed instructions for the passaging and expansion of the colon
 organoids, as well as detailed instructions for cell seeding and differentiation. We have used this
 protocol to coculture colon monolayers with genetically engineered Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron
 strains10.


 1
 Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 2Division of Endocrinology, Boston Children’s
 Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 3Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA. 4Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School,
 Boston, MA, USA. 5Department of Chemical Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. 6Center for Gynepathology Research,
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. ✉e-mail: griff@mit.edu

 3874 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 16 | AUGUST 2021 | 3874–3900 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 D–3

 D0
 Organoid
 seeding
 Organoid (Steps 1–14)
 passaging
 (Start of cycle)


 Medium
 change
 (Steps 35–39)
 D4


 D7 D7
 Proliferation
 Monolayer Organoid
 seeding passaging
 (Steps 40–62) (Steps 15–34)


 Input 1 Output 3

 D10 Input 2 Output 1
 Output 2


 Monolayer
 differentiation
 D14
 (Steps 63–80)

 Bacterium–epithelium
 O coculturing
 OH
 OH
 (Steps 81–94)
 H

 H H
 HO
 H
 TEER prior to
 D14–2 h bacteria introduction
 (Steps 67–79)

 Incubation
 with inducer
 (Steps 95–97)

 D14–8 h


 Strain Inducer
 Sampling
 MT768 aTc (Steps 98–100)
 MT798 DCA
 MT799 aTc + DCA
 MT800 None TEER after sampling
 bacteria in apical medium


 Luminescence Monolayer
 measurement + imaging
 (Steps 101–102) (Box 1)

 Fig. 1 | Schematic workﬂow to generate differentiated colon epithelial monolayers and coculture with engineered
 B. thetaiotaomicron. The workﬂow includes initial organoid seeding (Steps 1–14), organoid passaging (Steps 15–34),
 organoid growth medium change (Steps 35–39), organoid processing for monolayer seeding (Steps 40–62),
 monolayer differentiation (Steps 63–80), bacteria-monolayer coculture (Steps 81–94), introduction of inducers
 (Steps 95–97), and sampling for downstream analysis (Steps 98–102). Sampling refers to the collection of apical
 medium containing bacteria as described in detail in Steps 98–100 and in the original publication10. In the coculture
 experiments we previously conducted10, engineered B. thetaiotaomicron MT798, MT799 and MT800 were used.
 Each strain carried a genetic circuit with designed response to inducers aTc (an antibiotic analog) and/or DCA (a
 secondary bile acid in human colon). As a control, B. thetaiotaomicron (MT768) engineered with constant expression
 of luminescence was used. TEER measurement is optional, but we recommend it be performed at key timepoints
 (e.g., D7, D10 and D14), particularly prior to coculture with bacteria at D14 and after medium collection at D14. The
 procedure for TEER measurement is described in Steps 67–79.


 Comparison with other models that evaluate mammalian colon cell and bacterial cell
 interactions
 Engineered bacteria that harbor genetic circuits designed for speciﬁc therapeutic applications have
 been traditionally tested in simple in vitro bacterial culture models, such as the three-stage continuous

NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 16 | AUGUST 2021 | 3874–3900 | www.nature.com/nprot 3875

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 culture systems SHIME3 and PolyFermS4, followed by evaluation in animal models, but without
 evaluation in a mammalian cell culture model11–13. For example, in a previous publication, we fed
 mice with Bacteroides engineered with an inducible gene circuit, then measured the bacterial indu-
 cible response (luciferase activity) in the feces14. However, using this approach, it was difﬁcult to
 characterize the detailed performance of the bacterial genetic circuit within the mice, in part because
 of difﬁculties visualizing bacterial adherence to the small intestinal/colon epithelium15.
 Animal experiments are also low-throughput and expensive, and the method of bacterial
 administration (for example by gavage) adds complexity in the procedure. Further, animals and
 humans differ in their physiology, diet, mucus composition, mucosal immunology, molecular
 transport and native microbiota composition, all of which can radically impact bacterial biology16,17.
 Such differences can make it difﬁcult to extrapolate the performance of an engineered bacterium from
 an animal model to humans (https://investor.synlogictx.com/news-releases/news-release-details/
 synlogic-discontinues-development-synb1020-treat-hyperammonemia)12. Evaluating bacterial per-
 formance in humans, however, is even slower and convoluted because of patient-to-patient variability
 and issues involving regulatory compliance. Thus, the ability to evaluate the performance of engi-
 neered bacteria in an in vitro model that mimics critical features of the human colonic environment
 relevant for the bacterial circuits in question is desirable. In contrast to animal models, in vitro
 gut models enable fast turnover (i.e., 2–4 weeks for monolayer preparation in Transwells) and
 intermediate throughput (16 Transwells or more per week).
 The cellular, geometry and operation capabilities of in vitro gut models can be varied to simulate
 human gut biology. For instance, an in vitro gut model can include an epithelial monolayer in
 combination with neuronal and immune cells by using either commercial cell lines or tissue-derived
 primary cells with static or dynamic mechanical stimulation, which appears to promote mucus and
 villus-like structures6–9. Native gut microbiota, such as Bacteroides spp., can be introduced into such
 devices for hours to weeks, depending on the culture conﬁguration and luminal medium exchange
 rates, to enable mechanistic studies to better understand the effects of the microbiota18–26. Two-
 dimensional culture of epithelial monolayers or bilayers with supporting cells in standardized
 Transwell inserts are often used for evaluating drug interactions with human colon because of the
 easy access to both luminal and basal compartments27–32; however, these have not been widely
 deployed to test engineered bacteria safety and performance. These intestinal models were tradi-
 tionally developed using commercially available cell lines33, and recently expanded to use primary
 rodent and human small intestinal cells as a starting material27–32.
 More complex in vitro gut models that require highly specialized apparatus or 3D architecture19–21,24,34–37
 have also been developed but are often tailored for narrow and speciﬁc applications. For example,
 Jalili-Firoozinezhad et al. designed a customized anaerobic chamber that enables the culture of
 obligate anaerobes in two-channel microﬂuidic gut-on-a-chip24. In another customized microﬂuidics-
 based gut model (HuMiX), Shah et al. created two microchambers separated by a nanoporous
 membrane to prevent intestinal cells from direct contact with bacterial cells during coculture
 experiments21. Unfortunately, the complexity of the gut devices makes them impractical for routine
 use in all but a few dedicated laboratories and are not always generalizable to desired readouts.
 Simpliﬁed gut models using Transwell-type inserts have been used for a variety of applications,
 including drug screening27, drug toxicity28, drug transport30, cytokine secretion38, host–parasite
 interactions29, host–pathogen interactions39,40 and host–norovirus interactions41,42. Because the luminal
 side of the epithelial monolayer in Transwell culture is completely accessible, it is easy to introduce
 bacteria, add any stimuli and collect samples over multiple time points. Therefore, monolayer cultures
 can be scaled up to screen multiple conditions and bacterial strains with substantially higher throughput
 than animal models. A drawback of static monolayer models is the inability to maintain a super-strict
 anaerobic luminal environment or a constant supply of nutrients, making it difﬁcult to establish long-
 term stable cocultures owing to short life span of host cells18 and bacterial overgrowth20. While the
 oxygen concentration at the surface of an epithelial monolayer in a static Transwell in the presence of
 bacteria can approach microaerobic or even moderately anaerobic states43, static monolayers are
 therefore limited in application to aerobes and aerotolerant anaerobes. This limitation can be overcome
 by combining the Transwell monolayer model with microphysiological systems technology20,26,43.
 Gut organoid models have emerged as a new tool to study host–microbe interactions44. The
 culture of organoids from primary human and animal intestinal tissues enables the routine
 maintenance of intestinal organoids from different donors27,44–46. In addition to tissue-derived
 organoids, intestinal organoids can also be derived from human pluripotent stem cells, although the
 differentiation requires up to 4 weeks and does not recapitulate features of adult tissue47,48.

3876 NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 16 | AUGUST 2021 | 3874–3900 | www.nature.com/nprot

NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL
 Table 1 | Application of the protocol to different donors that varied in age, sex and colon biopsy region

 Donor no. Experiment no. Patient age Patient sex Patient pathology Tissue collected Culture

 1 HC2978 30 years Male Diverticulosis and Rectosigmoid (normal O, M
 diverticulitis appearing region)
 2 HC176 6 months Female Non-IBD Ascending colon O, M
 3 HC465 18 years Male UC Ascending colon O, M
 4 HC100 N/A N/A UC Ascending colon O, M
 5 HC511 12 years N/A UC Ascending colon O
 6 HC457 19 years Female Non-IBD Sigmoid colon O
 7 HC443 15 years N/A UC Ascending colon O
 Donors 5, 6 and 7 were at the stage of generating organoids, and thus were not used for generating monolayers. IBD, inﬂammatory bowel diseases; M, monolayer culture protocol applied to the
 indicated donor; N/A, not applicable (not identiﬁed); O, organoid culture protocol applied to the indicated donor; UC, ulcerative colitis.


 Intestinal organoids consist of a single layer of epithelial cells surrounding a hollow central lumen;
 thus, microbes are introduced into the lumen (apical side) using microinjection techniques49 that are
 labor intensive, require extensive technical expertise and are, hence, relatively low throughput.
 Further, depending on the types of readouts required (e.g., ﬂuorescence, transcriptomic, proteomic,
 metabolomic, etc), multiple organoids may be required to create enough sample for testing. In
 addition, in organoid cultures, antibiotics must be added into the culture medium to keep the
 basolateral side free from bacteria49, resulting in alterations to intestinal function that are indepen-
 dent of antimicrobial activity50.
 To utilize the strengths of the organoid and monolayer systems, while also overcoming some of the
 limitations discussed above, we and other researchers developed methods to generate primary human
 colon monolayers in a standard cell culture membrane insert (Transwell) from colon proliferative
 cells previously maintained as organoids10,27,29,51,52. This protocol generates primary human colon
 epithelial monolayers that contain differentiated and proliferative cells. The monolayers exhibit
 physical and biological barrier functions as indicated by an increase in transepithelial electrical
 resistance (TEER) values over time. In contrast to other systems19–21,24,34,35, the open conﬁguration of
 the Transwell allows access to both the apical and basolateral sides of the epithelium for the
 incorporation of bacterial cells engineered with genetic circuits and their corresponding inducers at
 different time points during a given experiment.


 Applications of the protocol
 Human gut models can provide a physiological environment for testing safety and efﬁcacy of bio-
 logics before progressing to animal or human trials53. For instance, engineered bacteria with inducible
 gene circuits can be validated in standard bacterial culture conditions and then tested for efﬁcacy in
 an in vitro gut model. We recently employed this strategy to test engineered bacteria with gene
 circuits that respond to different colon microenvironments, using a primary human colon mucosal
 barrier in a static culture conﬁguration10. Further, gut models can be combined with physiomimetic/
 microﬂuidic systems technology to recapitulate complex multicellular crosstalk. For example, we
 recently used a physiomimetic platform to study the crosstalk between primary human colon epi-
 thelial cells with oxygen-intolerant commensal Faecalibacterium prausnitzii26. In addition, we also
 built a physiomimetic platform to study multicellular crosstalk among gut–liver–immune cells in the
 context of ulcerative colitis52.
 The methods described here have been used to successfully expand organoids from donors of
 different sex, age, colon regions and disease state (mainly ulcerative colitis) (Table 1); thus, we
 anticipate that this method could be extended to other human intestinal tissues (e.g., small intestine)
 and other understudied mucosal barriers, such as oral cavity, endocervix and endometrium. Indeed,
 the organoid and monolayer technique has been successfully applied to stem-cell-derived small
 intestinal enteroids41 to study host–virus interactions in different microenvironments54. In addition,
 we anticipate that this protocol can be adopted to study a variety of other important topics in mucosal
 epithelial biology, including host–pathogen interactions, drug absorption and toxicity in the context
 of personalized medicine.

NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL 16 | AUGUST 2021 | 3874–3900 | www.nature.com/nprot 3877

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 Box 1 | EDU staining to determine the proliferative state of the monolayer ● Timing setup 1 h, incubation 1 d, imaging 0.5 h
 After Step 75, EdU staining can be performed to determine the proportion of proliferative cells. We do this using the Click-iT EdU Cell Proliferation
 Kit following the instructions given below.

 Materials speciﬁc to EDU staining
 ● Click-iT EdU Cell Proliferation Kit (C10337-488, C10424-647, C10646-594)
