PROTOCOL
 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-020-00474-1

 Long-term culture, genetic manipulation and
 xenotransplantation of human normal and
 breast cancer organoids
 Johanna F. Dekkers1,2,3 ✉, Esmée J. van Vliet 2,3, Norman Sachs1,3,10, Jennifer M. Rosenbluth4,5,
 Oded Kopper6, Heggert G. Rebel2,3, Ellen J. Wehrens2,3, Carol Piani7, Jane E. Visvader8,9,
 Carla S. Verissimo7, Sylvia F. Boj7, Joan S. Brugge4, Hans Clevers 1,2,3,11 and Anne C. Rios 2,3,11
 Organoid technology has revolutionized the study of human organ development, disease and therapy response tailored to
 the individual. Although detailed protocols are available for the generation and long-term propagation of human organoids
 from various organs, such methods are lacking for breast tissue. Here we provide an optimized, highly versatile protocol
 for long-term culture of organoids derived from either normal human breast tissues or breast cancer (BC) tissues, as well
 as culturing conditions for a panel of 45 biobanked samples, including BC organoids covering all major disease subtypes
 (triple-negative, estrogen receptor-positive/progesterone receptor-positive and human epidermal growth receptor
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

 2-positive). Additionally, we provide methods for genetic manipulation by Lipofectamine 2000, electroporation or
 lentivirus and subsequent organoid selection and clonal culture. Finally, we introduce an optimized method for orthotopic
 organoid transplantation in mice, which includes injection of organoids and estrogen pellets without the need for surgery.
 Organoid derivation from tissue fragments until the ﬁrst split takes 7–21 d; generation of genetically manipulated clonal
 organoid cultures takes 14–21 d; and organoid expansion for xenotransplantation takes >4 weeks.

 Introduction
 BC remains the most widely diagnosed and second deadliest malignancy in women1. BC comprises
 multiple subtypes that arise through the sequential accumulation of mutations in resident epithelial
 cells and result in tumors with complex genomic and biological heterogeneity2–4. Standard ther-
 apeutic approaches are currently based on clinical and pathologic features, complemented by the
 expression status of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth
 factor receptor 2 (HER2)5 and are, thereby, inadequately tailored to individual patients. An extensive
 understanding of the processes underlying normal breast development, carcinogenesis and disease
 progression is necessary to devise novel personalized therapies, but this is hampered by a lack of
 suitable and widely available in vitro models. Organoid technology—the long-term propagation of
 human adult stem cells in three-dimensional (3D) cultures6—has provided unprecedented and
 transformative ways to study healthy organ development and tumorigenesis in vitro. Here we
 describe optimized protocols for human normal breast and BC organoids to model breast develop-
 ment and cancer.
 The described methods have been used to generate a biobank of BC organoids that typically
 recapitulated the original patient tumor in terms of histopathology, hormone receptor expression and
 HER2 status, as well as copy number variations and sequence changes, thereby capturing the full
 heterogeneity of BC (www.huborganoids.nl)7. Furthermore, normal organoid cultures contain basal/
 stem cells, luminal progenitors and mature luminal cells, thus preserving complex epithelial lineages8,

 1
 Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW) and University Medical Centre (UMC), Utrecht, the Netherlands.
 2
 Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, the Netherlands. 3Oncode Institute, Utrecht, the Netherlands. 4Department of Cell Biology,
 Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 5Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. 6NewStem, Silberman
 Institute for Life Sciences, Givat Ram, Jerusalem, Israel. 7Foundation Hubrecht Organoid Technology (HUB), Utrecht, the Netherlands. 8Cancer Biology
 and Stem Cells Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. 9Department of Medical Biology, The
 University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. 10Present address: Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc, San Diego, CA, USA. 11These authors contributed
 equally: Hans Clevers, Anne C. Rios. ✉e-mail: j.f.dekkers@prinsesmaximacentrum.nl

 ORGANOID DERIVATION
 Normal breast Breast tumor
 resection resection

 Steps 1–40 Steps 1–40
 2–6 h 2–6 h

 Normal breast Breast cancer
 organoids organoids

 Organoid Splitting ratio Expansion medium Cryopreservation
 ORGANOID MAINTENANCE

 maintenance
 Freezing
 Steps 54–57
 10–15 min
 Type 1

 Steps 58–64
 Steps 43–53 20 min
 35–60 min Type 2
 Thawing

 Lipofectamine-based Electroporation-based Lentiviral transduction
 GENETIC MANIPULATION

 transfection transfection

 Steps 65A Steps 65B Steps 65C
 5h 50–60 min 1–1.5 h

 Organoid selection Clone picking
 (CLONAL) SELECTION

 Selection
 agent

 Steps 66–68 Steps 69–77
 10 min 1.5–2 h

 Organoid Organoid Estrogen pellet Tumor formation
 XENOTRANSPLANTATION

 expansion harvesting implantation
 2–16 weeks
 Steps 78–84 Steps 85–89 Steps 98–107 Steps 90–97
 ~ 4 weeks 30–90 min 5–10 min 5 min

 Orthotopic
 injection

 Mammary
 fat pad

Organoids are established from resections of normal breast or tumor tissue, followed by organoid maintenance or freezing for long-term storage.
Genetic manipulation by Lipofectamine-based transfection, electroporation-based transfection or lentiviral transduction is described, as well as
(clonal) organoid selection. Orthotopic injection can be performed to grow organoid-derived tumors in vivo, with the stated time indicating time until
ﬁrst signs of tumor formation. Corresponding steps of the protocol and their timing are indicated in yellow boxes.

 and we previously engineered normal breast organoids using CRISPR–Cas9 to model the onset
 of BC9.

 Overview of the procedures
 A graphical overview of our protocol describing the efﬁcient derivation and long-term culturing of
 human normal and BC organoids and their downstream processing is depicted in Fig. 1. First, we
 describe how organoids can be derived from both normal and tumor resections, outline their
 respective culture conditions and explain how to maintain and cryopreserve the cultures. Then, we

1938
