38 Fix vascular networks (option A) or grow and ﬁx vascular organoids (option B).
(A) Preparation of vascular networks
CRITICAL Between 40 and 60 vascular networks can be analyzed from one 12-well culture
without any expected loss of material during the preparation procedure.
(i) Carefully aspirate the medium from a well using a P1000 pipette and add 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA) solution in PBS for 20 min at room temperature.
CRITICAL STEP PFA fumes will affect cell viability in neighboring wells. If not all the
wells of the 12-well plate are intended for ﬁxation, use a spatula to carefully lift selected gels
and use a spoon to transfer the matrix to another 12-well plate for ﬁxation.
(ii) Remove the PFA solution and add PBS.
PAUSE POINT Fixed blood vessel networks can be kept in PBS in the refrigerator for up
to 1 month. Seal the plate with Paraﬁlm to avoid liquid evaporation.
(iii) To proceed with staining, cut the gels into smaller pieces (1/4–1/2 of a 12-well gel) under a
stereomicroscope using extra-ﬁne scissors and ﬁne forceps. Avoid cutting through vascular
networks.
(iv) Use forceps to transfer the gel fragments to a fresh 2-mL Eppendorf tube.
(B) Establishment of blood vessel organoids and preparation for staining
(viii) Remove the medium carefully and add 4% PFA in PBS and leave the tube for 1 h at room
temperature.
(ix) Remove the PFA solution and add PBS.
PAUSE POINT Fixed blood vessel organoids can be kept in PBS in the refrigerator for up
to 1 month.
39 Add blocking buffer to permeabilize/block the vascular networks/blood vessel organoids/slides for
2 h at room temperature. For blood vascular networks/blood vessel organoids, add 2 mL of blocking
buffer per tube and rock tube rack (placed vertically on an orbital shaker) for proper blocking/
permeabilization. For slides, encircle the tissue with a liquid blocker pen and add 50–100 μL of
blocking buffer and incubate in a wet chamber.
40 Remove the blocking buffer and add 50–100 μL of primary antibody diluted in blocking buffer
(Table 1). Incubate vessel networks/organoids in an upright position on a rocking shaker at 4 °C
overnight. For sections, incubate in a wet chamber at 4°C overnight.
41 On the next day, wash the samples three times for 10–15 min in PBS-T solution. For vessel
networks/organoids, place the tube rack vertically on an orbital shaker for washing.
42 Add secondary ﬂuorescent antibody (Table 1) in blocking buffer and incubate for 2 h at room
temperature.
43 Wash the samples two times for 10–15 min in PBS-T solution.
44 Add DAPI solution (1:1,000 in PBS) and incubate for 10–15 min.
45 Wash samples in PBS for 10–15 min.
