Procedure
 CRITICAL STEP Steps 1–42 describe how to generate and maintain organoid cultures from primary

 c
 human tissue material. The therapy screening protocol on the preparation of organoids and
 chemotherapeutics, as well as radiation and the subsequent cell-viability readout and its analysis, is
 described in Steps 43–81 and overviewed in Fig. 3a.

 Collection and preparation of primary human tissue for organoid culture generation
 ● Timing 1–24 h
 ! CAUTION Studies involving primary human tissue material must conform to all relevant institutional
 and governmental regulations. Informed consent must be obtained from all subjects before collection of
 the primary human tissue material.
 1 Collect primary human tissue pieces, separated by biopsy site and/or tissue type (i.e., normal and
 tumor tissue) in 45 ml of ice-cold adDMEM/F12+++ medium in 50-ml conical tubes. (Optional)
 Add 10 µM ROCK inhibitor to adDMEM/F12+++ medium to increase cell survival. Keep tissue
 samples in this medium at 4 °C until the start of the isolation.
 PAUSE POINT Depending on the primary tissue of origin, tissue pieces may be kept up to 72 h at
 j

 4 °C without signiﬁcant loss of organoid outgrowth, but, ideally, one should proceed with the next
 steps as soon as possible.
 2 Assess whether obtained tissue pieces consist purely of epithelium or if they also contain fat or
 muscle tissue. If so, remove non-epithelial components as much as possible using surgical scissors
 or scalpels and forceps under a dissection microscope. If not, continue to the next step immediately.
 CRITICAL STEP Non-epithelial material may slow down the digestion to single cells or cause an
 c

 overestimation of the number of (epithelial) cells with organoid-forming capacity.
 3 Mince the tissue into small fragments of 1–3 mm3 in a 10-cm cell culture dish using surgical
 scissors or scalpels.
 4 Fix one or two representative fragments in ﬁxative (i.e., 10% (wt/vol) formalin or 4% (wt/vol)
 paraformaldehyde) for histological analysis.
 5 Snap-freeze fragments for molecular (i.e., whole exome/genome sequencing or mRNA sequencing)
 or biochemical (i.e., Western blotting or proteomics) analysis at –80 °C. Such fragments may also
 be used to isolate DNA for quality controls/validation of patient of origin via SNP/STR
 ﬁngerprinting.

 Establishment of organoids from primary tissue ● Timing 2 h
 6 Digest the tissue (from Step 3) as appropriate based on the tumor type (Table 1). Carefully monitor
 digestion, and for <2-h incubations, mix contents every 10–15 min by shaking vigorously and by
 pipetting the mixture up and down using a P1000 pipette. For overnight incubations, place the
 mixture on a shaker. Addition of 10 µM ROCK inhibitor during digestion can increase outgrowth
 efﬁciency. For head and neck organoids, digestion should not exceed 1 h and should be monitored
 regularly.
 CRITICAL Carefully monitor the digestion, as over-digestion may signiﬁcantly decrease the
 c

 outgrowth efﬁciency. As a rule of thumb, digestion is complete when a mixture of cell clusters
 (consisting of 2–10 cells) can be observed. When commencing the culture of a new tissue type,
 it is recommended to take small samples from the digest during digestion and plate them to
 determine the best average digestion time for this particular tissue.
 7 When the mixture becomes cloudy and the remaining tissue fragments are disrupted, further aid
 tissue disruption by pipetting up and down 10–20 times using a P1000 pipette. Wash once by
 topping up with 10 ml of adDMEM/F12+++ medium, and centrifuge at 200g for 5 min at 4 °C.
 8 Resuspend the pellet in 10 ml of adDMEM/F12+++ medium, and ﬁlter using a 100-µm
 cell strainer.
 9 Centrifuge the resuspended and ﬁltered cells at 200g for 5 min at 4 °C.
 10 Aspirate the supernatant and resuspend the pellet in BME or Matrigel. BME should be kept on ice
 to prevent it from solidifying; thus, work quickly. The amount of BME depends on the size of the
 pellet. Approximately 10,000 cells should be plated in 40 µl of BME.
 CRITICAL Do not dilute BME too much (BME should be >70% (vol/vol)) to ensure formation of
 c

 solid droplets.
 11 Plate the BME containing organoids on the bottom of pre-heated 24-well suspension cell culture
 plates in drops of ~10 µl each. Place three to four drops into each well.

 CRITICAL Once the organoids are resuspended in BME, proceed with plating as quickly as

 c
 possible, as the BME may solidify in the tube or pipette tip.
 CRITICAL Plates should be pre-heated overnight by placing them into a humidiﬁed incubator at

 c
 37 °C. If not properly pre-heated, BME droplets will immediately ﬂatten out on the surface of the
 culture plate and organoids can more easily attach to the bottom of the plate.
 ? TROUBLESHOOTING
 12 Place the culture plate into a humidiﬁed incubator at 37 °C and 5% (vol/vol) CO2 for 20–30 min to
 let the BME solidify.
 13 Prepare the required amount of organoid medium (tissue-speciﬁc growth factors are listed in
 Supplementary Table 1), add 10 µM ROCK inhibitor and Primocin (100 µg/ml) and place medium
 in the 37 °C water bath. For head and neck organoids, additionally add 0.5 µg/ml caspofungin to the
 human head and neck organoid medium (see Reagent setup).
 14 Once the BME drops are solidiﬁed (30–60 min), ﬂip the plate and carefully add 500 µl of organoid
 medium to each well.
 CRITICAL Do not add medium directly on top of the BME drops, as this might disrupt
 c

 the droplets.
 15 Place the culture plate in a humidiﬁed incubator at 37 °C and 5% (vol/vol) CO2.
 16 Change the medium every 2–3 d by carefully aspirating medium from the wells and
 replacing it with fresh, pre-warmed medium. Keep ROCK inhibitor and Primocin (in the
 case of head and neck organoids, also caspofungin) in the culture medium for the ﬁrst two
 passages of the culture.
 CRITICAL BME drops may detach from the suspension plates and ‘swim’ in the medium. In this
 c

 case, we recommend re-plating the organoids without TrypLE-based organoid dissociation. Closely
 monitor organoid formation. Ideally, organoids should be passaged for the ﬁrst time between
 12 and 14 d after initial plating.
 CRITICAL Do not proceed too quickly to splitting, as this might result in termination of
 c

 the culture.
 CRITICAL In the ﬁrst passages, ensure optimal density of the culture (as a general rule of thumb,
 c

 aim for 10,000 cells per 40 µl), even if this means replating material to decrease the number
 of wells.
 ? TROUBLESHOOTING

 Splitting of organoids ● Timing 1 h
 17 Pipette up and down to disrupt BME or Matrigel, and transfer the organoid suspension to a 15-ml
 conical tube.
 18 To aid in the removal of BME, top the volume up with 10 ml of ice-cold adDMEM/F12+++
 medium.
 19 Centrifuge organoids at 200g for 5 min at 4 °C.
 20 Aspirate the supernatant, and split organoids using either TrypLE (for head and neck and compact
 breast, colon, pancreatic and liver organoids) or mechanical disruption (ovarian and cystic breast,
 colon, pancreatic and liver organoids). For TrypLE-based cell dissociation, resuspend the pellet in 1
 ml of TrypLE, pipette up and down and incubate at 37 °C until organoids fall apart. Pipette up and
 down with a P1000 ﬁlter tip with a (non-ﬁltered) P10 tip on top for ≥10 times every 3–5 min to aid
 disruption of the organoids. Monitor digestion closely to keep the incubation time in TrypLE to a
 minimum. In case of mechanical disruption, resuspend the pellet in 3 ml of adDMEM/F12+++
 medium. Use a P1000 ﬁlter pipette tip with a (non-ﬁltered) P10 tip on top to pipette the organoid
 suspension up and down 30 times. Use the bottom of the tube to create pressure, which will aid
 organoid disruption.
 CRITICAL Do not dissociate in TrypLE for >15 min, as this may result in poor organoid
 c

 outgrowth or even loss of the culture. As a rule of thumb, digestion is complete if a mixture of small
 clumps of cells (consisting of 2–10 cells) can be observed.
 CRITICAL In case of preparation for drug screening, incomplete digestion resulting in big clumps
 c

 of cells or pieces of organoid that are left intact will result in a small yield at the collection of
 organoids, as these will be ﬁltered out during the preparation of the organoid suspension for
 drug screening.
 ? TROUBLESHOOTING
 21 After shearing is complete, wash with 10 ml of adDMEM/F12+++ medium.

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 22 Resuspend the organoid pellet in 70% (vol/vol) BME, and plate organoids in small droplets on the
 bottom of a pre-warmed culture plate as described in Steps 10–13. After plating is complete, invert
 the plate and place it in a humidiﬁed incubator at 37 °C and 5% (vol/vol) CO2 for 30–60 min.
 23 Pre-warm organoid medium containing 10 µM ROCK inhibitor at 37 °C.
 24 After BME drops have solidiﬁed (30–60 min), carefully pipette pre-warmed medium into the wells.
 CRITICAL Make sure to not pipette the medium directly onto the BME drops, as this will disrupt

 c
 the drops.
 25 Place culture plates in a humidiﬁed incubator at 37 °C and 5% (vol/vol) CO2 until the organoids are
 needed for the drug screen.

 (Optional) Freezing of organoids ● Timing 30 min–1 h
 CRITICAL Organoids do not have to be frozen prior to drug screening and can be used immediately
 c

 by proceeding directly from Step 25 to Step 43.
 26 2–3 d after splitting, remove the medium, and add 500 µl of adDMEM/F12+++ medium into each
 well. Break up the BME drops using a P1000 ﬁlter tip, and transfer the material to an ice-cold 15-ml
 conical tube.
 CRITICAL To ensure removal of BME by washing, a maximum of 12 wells of a 24-well cell
 c

 culture plate should be pooled in a 15-ml conical tube. If more material is used, use multiple tubes
 per culture, which can be pooled later in the process of preparing the organoids for screening.
 27 (Optional) If you are freezing more wells or several cell culture plates, adjust the number of 15-ml
 conical tubes accordingly.
 28 (Optional) If there are large amounts of BME, ﬁll up the 15-ml conical tubes containing the
 organoids to a total volume of 12 ml with ice-cold adDMEM/F12+++ medium, pipette up and
 down with a pre-wetted (using adDMEM/F12+++) 10-ml serological pipette and put the tube on
 ice for 10 min. Pipette up and down again several times with a 10-ml serological pipette. Leaving
 the sample on ice longer will further dissolve the BME.
 29 Centrifuge the organoids at 200g for 5 min at 4 °C.
 30 Aspirate the supernatant without disturbing the pellet.
 31 (Optional) If multiple 15-ml conical tubes were used to collect one organoid culture, resuspend the
 pellet of each 15-ml conical tube in 1 ml of adDMEM/F12+++ medium, and transfer them all into
 a 15-ml conical tube. Centrifuge the organoids again at 200g for 5 min at 4 °C, and aspirate the
 supernatant without disturbing the pellet.
 32 Add the required volume of cell-freezing medium, and pipette up and down using a P1000 pipette
 to properly resuspend the organoids.
 CRITICAL 500 μl of freezing medium should be used for four ‘original’ wells with organoids of a
 c

 24-well cell culture plate.
 33 Per sterile cryogenic vial, add 500 µl of freezing medium with the resuspended organoids.
 34 Place the cryogenic vial into a freezing container. Store the freezing container with the samples
 at –80 °C.
 35 After storage at –80 °C for 24 h, remove the vials from the freezing container, and transfer them to
 the liquid nitrogen tank (approximately –180 °C).
 PAUSE POINT Cryopreserved organoids can be stored in the liquid nitrogen tank for
 j

 several years.

 (Optional) Thawing of cryopreserved organoids ● Timing 1 h
 36 Collect the cryogenic vial with the cryopreserved organoids from the liquid nitrogen tank on
 dry ice.
 37 Per cryogenic vial to be thawed, prepare a 15-ml conical tube with 10 ml of adDMEM/F12+++
 medium at room temperature.
 38 To thaw the freezing medium with the organoids, incubate the cryogenic vial for 1–3 min in a water
 bath at 37 °C.
 CRITICAL Carefully monitor the thawing, and remove the cryogenic vial from the water bath as
 c

 soon as the freezing medium has thawed. To allow for the time required to walk to the culture hood,
 taking the vial out of the waterbath when a small clump of ice is still present can be considered.
 39 Add 1 ml of adDMEM/F12+++ medium dropwise into the cryogenic vial while mixing, and then
 transfer the entire volume with the organoids in the vial to a 15-ml conical tube. Fill the tube with
 adDMEM/F12+++ medium to a total volume of 10 ml.

 40 Centrifuge the organoids at 200g for 5 min at 4 °C.
 41 Aspirate the supernatant without disturbing the pellet.
 42 Follow Steps 22–25, as described above.
 CRITICAL If, since this is dependent on the volume of thawed organoids, the freezing medium

 c
 was not diluted at least 10 times during washing, an additional wash step should be performed to
 ensure sufﬁcient dilution of the freezing medium before plating.

 Preparation of organoid solution for dispensation into screening plates ● Timing day
 3, 1.5 h
 CRITICAL Before you start screening, the tumor status of the cells should be conﬁrmed (e.g., by DNA
 c

 sequencing) to ensure that tumor cells (and not normal epithelial cells) are maintained in culture.
 43 Split organoids 2 d before the start of the screen as previously described in Steps 17–25 (Table 2).
 44 Check organoids using a microscope to assess the quality of the culture and exclude the possibility
 of culture contamination before commencing organoid preparation.
 45 Add 1 mg/ml dispase II to the culture medium in each well, and disrupt BME droplets using a
 P1000 pipette. Place the plate back in the incubator for 40 min.
 46 After 40 min, collect the content of the wells, and pipette up and down 10 times to facilitate
 disintegration of the BME. Top up with 10 ml of adDMEM/F12+++ medium per 2 ml of collected
 organoid suspension, resuspend using the pre-wetted 10-ml serological pipette and centrifuge.
 47 Resuspend the pellet in 10 ml of adDMEM/F12+++ medium.
 CRITICAL If a less dense, glass-like pellet is observed on top of the cell pellet, this means that the
 c

 removal of the BME was not complete. Washing with ice-cold adDMEM/F12+++ medium should
 be repeated until the BME is removed. Keep the tube on ice for 10 min between washes, and pipette
 up and down 10 times using a 10-ml serological pipette before centrifugation.
 48 Resuspend the pellet in 10 ml of adDMEM/F12+++ medium, and ﬁlter the organoid suspension
 using a 70-µm cell strainer. Transfer the ﬁltered solution back to a 15-ml conical tube, and
 spin down.
 49 Resuspend the pellet in adDMEM/F12+++ medium (1–10 ml depending on the size of the pellet),
 and transfer 10 µl of the organoid solution to a disposable counting chamber. Count organoids,
 transfer the required amount of total organoid solution to a new 15-ml conical tube and spin down.
 CRITICAL Before the sample for counting is taken, ensure that the organoid solution is homogenized
 c

 well and that no clumps of the pellet remain in solution. This is essential to obtain a correct estimation
 of the total orgnaoid number after counting. To ensure proper resuspension of the organoid pellet, it
 can ﬁrst be resuspended in 1 mL adDMEM/F12+++ using a P1000 pipette. Once resuspended, the
 additional volume of adDMEM/F12+++ can be added using a serological pipette.
 50 Resuspend the pellet in complete organoid medium containing 5% (vol/vol) BME. For this, ﬁrst
 resuspend the pellet with a P200 pipette in a small volume of the 5% (vol/vol) BME/organoid
 medium solution to ensure that the pellet is nicely resuspended. Subsequently, top up with the
 remaining volume of the mixture of medium and BME.

 Dispensation of organoids into 384-well drug-screening plates ● Timing day 3, 20 min
 CRITICAL To dispense organoids, we use Thermo Scientiﬁc’s Multidrop Combi reagent dispenser.
 c

 However, comparable machines can, of course, also be used.
 51 Wash the tubing of the dispenser according to the manufacturer’s instructions. When using the Thermo
 system, start by washing the tubes with MilliQ water, followed by a wash with 70% (vol/vol) ethanol
 solution. Wash once with PBS. Subsequently, wash again with PBS from a clean 50-ml conical tube. In
 general, clean tubes ﬁlled with solutions should be used only once, to prevent ‘contamination’ from
 previous wash steps being passed on to the next washing solution. A ‘wash’ is deﬁned as ﬂushing a
 minimum of twice the tube volume of liquid per tube through the tubing. Do not let the tubing dry after
 priming with PBS or medium, since the salts in the solution will form crystals in the tubes.
 CRITICAL Tubing should be calibrated before usage, according to the manufacturer’s
 c

 instructions. Calibrate at least every 3 months, although we recommend checking if calibration
 is still accurate before each screen to minimize variation in the assay plate.
 52 Before priming with organoids, ﬂush the tubing at least once with ice-cold adDMEM/F12+++
 medium.
 53 Invert Falcon tubes with organoid suspension to ensure that the organoid solution is
 homogeneously distributed (organoids will sink to the bottom of the tube if left standing still).

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 After ensuring a homogeneous distribution, prime the tubing with organoids until the solution has
 completely passed through the tubing.
 54 Start the program to dispense the organoid solution into a black-/clear-bottom ultra-low
 attachment 384-well cell culture plate. Our setting is a 384-well cell culture plate format, with 40 µl
 per well.
 CRITICAL Make sure that the protocol is started as quickly as possible after priming is complete;

 c
 otherwise, organoids will sink to the bottom of the tube and will not be homogeneously dispensed
 over the culture plate. To ensure homogeneous distribution of organoids, the stock organoid
 solution can be pipetted up and down during dispensing using a serological pipette. However, be
 careful not to introduce air in the dispenser tubing if taking this approach.
 ? TROUBLESHOOTING
 55 (Optional) If GR metrics are the viability measure of choice, cell viability of untreated cells will need
 to be determined on day 3. To set up this assay, in addition to plating in the screening plate
 (Step 54), dispense organoids (40 µl per well, a minimum of three wells) in a separate plate, and
 immediately perform a readout as described in Steps 75–79 using CellTiter-Glo 3D reagent. Store
 the raw data that are obtained, as these will be used during the data analysis once the drug screen
 has been completed.
 56 After organoids have been dispensed, conﬁrm a homogeneous distribution of organoids in the
 drug-screening plate using a microscope. We recommend taking brightﬁeld images of
 representative wells on this day of the assay. Place the screening plate in a humidiﬁed incubator
 at 37 °C and 5% (vol/vol) CO2.
 57 Clean the dispenser according to the manufacturer’s instructions. When using the Thermo system,
 ﬁrst eject the remaining organoid suspension. Perform a wash with MilliQ water, followed by a
 wash with 1% Micro-90 soap solution (provided with the machine) and 10% (wt/vol) chloride
 solution. Finish cleaning by washing twice with MilliQ water. For these last two washes, use
 separate 50-ml conical tubes that are ﬁlled with water, to prevent ‘contamination’ from the previous
 washing solution being passed to the solution that is subsequently used for washing. A ‘wash’ is
 deﬁned as ﬂushing a minimum of twice the tube volume of liquid per tube through the tubing. Do
 not let the tubing dry after priming with PBS or medium, since the salts in the solution will form
 crystals in the tubes. Ensure proper cleaning, as tubes get easily clogged.

 Addition of chemotherapeutics into the culture plate ● Timing day 3, 20–30 min
 CRITICAL We use the Tecan D300e digital dispenser for the addition of drugs. However, comparable
 c

 machines can also be used. If desired, the drug distribution layout can be generated before the start of
 the experiment to decrease the time between dispensation of organoids and addition of drugs.
 58 Open a new plate layout using the provided software (if using the HP d300e, use the corresponding
 d300e software).
 59 Select the desired plate type (384-well cell culture plate), and set additional volume to 40 µl (top
 right above culture plate layout when using the HPd300e; Supplementary Fig. 1a).
 60 Add all the compounds that will be used in the drug screen to the program, with their
 corresponding concentrations (Supplementary Fig. 1b). Do not exceed 10 mM as a stock
 concentration for any of the drugs used (following the drug dispenser protocol). For drugs dissolved
 in PBS or water, add soap to the stock to ensure that they dispense correctly. Use an appropriate
 amount to give an end concentration of 0.3% (vol/vol) Tween-20 in your stock.
 61 Create the screening layout containing the drug gradients by placing concentration gradients of the
 desired drugs in the screening plate layout (Supplementary Fig. 1c). Include technical replicates (we
 recommend a minimum of three replicates per plate). For drugs that we have tested, an overview of
 the concentration ranges used for HNSCC organoids is provided as an example in Table 3.
 CRITICAL Do not use the outer edges of the plate, as evaporation might create an edge effect and
 c

 introduce bias in your plate.
 CRITICAL Optimal concentration ranges will differ per therapy tested, which should be determined
 c

 before screening. Keep in mind the guidelines regarding the number and range of concentrations36,86.
 62 Include the positive control (1–10 µM staurosporin) in at least triplicate in the plate layout
 (Supplementary Fig. 1d).
 63 When ﬁnished, select all the wells that will be included in the screen, plus the wells that will not be
 exposed to drugs but will serve as negative controls, and press ‘Normalization’ to ensure that total
 solvent volume will be equal in all wells (Supplementary Fig. 1e).

 organoids)

 Drug Minimum concentration Maximum concentration Drug solvent

 Cisplatin 0.1 µM 100 µM PBS + 0.3% (vol/vol) Tween-20
 Carboplatin 0.1 µM 100 µM PBS + 0.3% (vol/vol) Tween-20
 Cetuximab 90 µg/ml 3 µg/ml PBS + 0.3% (vol/vol) Tween-20
 Nutlin-3 0.8 µM 20 µM DMSO
 Alpelisib 0.18 µM 50 µM DMSO
 Everolimus 0.5 µM 30 µM DMSO
 Nirapib 0.7 µM 50 µM DMSO
 Palbociclib 0.5 µM 30 µM PBS + 0.3% (vol/vol) Tween-20
 AZD4547 0.1 µM 50 µM DMSO

 CRITICAL Do not exceed 1% (vol/vol) DMSO or 2.5% (vol/vol) PBS/0.3% (vol/vol) Tween-20 in
 c

 the total well volume, as in our experience, exceeding these concentrations will result in cell death.
 Use as high a stock volume of drug as possible, to minimize the addition of solvent solution
 (Supplementary Fig. 1e).
 CRITICAL Ensure that each plate has a minimum of three wells that can serve as negative
 c

 controls. Ideally, distribute these in different places in the plate to prevent local effects inﬂuencing
 the outcome of the plate.
 CRITICAL Be aware that separate negative controls need to be established for drugs dissolved in
 c

 DMSO and for those dissolved in PBS/Tween-20. Alternatively, all wells of the entire screen can be
 normalized with both solvents. However, be aware that, depending on the volumes added, this
 might negatively affect cell viability and thus requires testing before screening.
 64 Save the program (Supplementary Fig. 1f).
 65 Switch on the drug dispenser and press ‘RUN’. The volumes of drug stocks required will be shown.
 For drugs dissolved in PBS or water, take the volume required plus 5% extra, and add Tween-20 to
 a ﬁnal concentration of 0.3%. Use immediately, and dispose of the remaining stock.
 CRITICAL Do not store a drug stock once 0.3% Tween-20 has been added, as long-term storage
 c

 in the presence of soap may interfere with drug effects (e.g., we have noticed this when using
 antibodies). Therefore, always add soap fresh to the drug stock, and use only the volume of drug
 stock that will be required for that particular screen.
 66 When all stocks are thawed and ready (and Tween-20 added where required), run the program (by
 pressing ‘START’) to dispense the drugs in the organoid plate.
 67 Once completed, place the culture plate in a humidiﬁed incubator at 37 °C and 5% (vol/vol) CO2. A
 report ﬁle in .xls format will automatically be generated when a protocol is completed. This ﬁle
 contains all the information (including dispensed concentrations) of all the drugs dispensed and
 can be used during data analysis.
 68 If you wish to combine drug treatment with radiotherapy, continue to Step 69 of this protocol. If
 not, leave the plate for 5 d until readout, and move on to Step 75 of the protocol. During this
 incubation, we recommend the use of Breathe-Easy sealing membranes rather than plate lids, to
 prevent evaporation during incubation. This has been shown to decrease assay variability69.
 CRITICAL Try to avoid opening the incubator during incubation with the drugs to ensure
 c

 optimal conditions for drug-screening plates (for example, use a separate incubator for these plates
 that is not used for ‘regular’ tissue culture). Do not stack drug-screening plates; instead, keep them
 all at the bottom of a shelf and in the back of the incubator to keep conditions as constant and
 comparable between different plates as possible.

 (Optional stage) Irradiation of organoids in 384-well cell culture plate format
 ● Timing day 4, 10–20 min
 ! CAUTION Studies involving a radioactive source such as a gamma irradiator may require prior
 approval and must conform to all relevant institutional and governmental regulations.
 CRITICAL Radiotherapy is usually applied on the day after the addition of chemotherapeutic agents to
 c

 the screening plate. In chemoradiotherapy, the chemotherapy acts as a radiosensitizer and should

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 therefore enhance the effect of radiotherapy on the cells. To translate this to an in vitro test, we include a
 24-h chemotherapy incubation before application of radiotherapy. The 24-h incubation works well for
 the combination of radiotherapy with the drugs that we have tested (cisplatin, carboplatin and
 cetuximab). This window might need to be changed for other drugs of interest.
 69 Set the radiation machine to the desired radiation dose (e.g., 2 Gy when combined with
 chemotherapy).
 70 Cover the edges of the plate with Paraﬁlm to prevent water from entering the culture plate.
 Preferably, Breathe-Easy sealing membranes are used to cover the plates (see Step 68). If these are
 used, Paraﬁlm is not required.
 71 Transfer the Paraﬁlm-wrapped plate to a box ﬁlled with tap water at room temperature. The water
 level should be the highest it can be without covering the plate. For this step, the sealing membranes
 (described in Steps 68 and 70) are very convenient because they provide another barrier to keep
 water from entering the plate wells.
 72 Place the box under the radiation beam, and make sure that the beam will be aimed at the center of
 the culture plate.
 73 Leave the room, and irradiate the plate.
 CRITICAL Irradiate only one plate at a time, and do not irradiate stacks of plates, as equal
 c

 distribution of radiation cannot be ensured.
 74 Remove the Paraﬁlm, and use a paper tissue to dry the culture plate. Place the plate back in the
 incubator until the day of the readout.

 Cell-viability readout of drug-screening plates ● Timing day 7, 45 min
 75 Thaw CellTiter-Glo 3D reagent in a water bath at 37 °C for 15 min (until completely thawed). Try
 to prevent freeze–thaw cycles of CellTiter-Glo 3D reagent, for example, by preparing aliquots of the
 reagent that can be used to perform the readout on one plate.
 76 Use your dispenser (the same machine that was used for organoid dispensation is used here) to add
 40 µl of CellTiter-Glo 3D reagent to each well of the drug-screening plate.
 CRITICAL CellTiter-Glo 3D reagent will lyse the cells; thus, if image collection is part of the readout,
 c

 do this before the addition of CellTiter-Glo 3D reagent to the culture plate. We recommend taking
 brightﬁeld images of representative wells (control, drug of interest), as noted in Step 56.
 77 Shake the plate for 5 min using the dispensing machine.
 CRITICAL Shaking on a regular plate shaker will not result in mixing of the content of the 384-
 c

 well cell culture plate, because of the small area. Therefore, shakers adapted for this plate format are
 required.
 78 Incubate the assay plate for 15 min at room temperature.
 79 Perform the readout by measuring the luminescence intensity of each well. We use the Tecan Spark
 multimode microplate reader for this, but, of course, comparable machines can also be used.
 Luminescence should be measured for 500 ms per well. If the signal is low, longer detecting times
 can be used.

 Analysis of drug-screening results ● Timing day 7 or later, 45 min
 CRITICAL We describe how to use Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism. These instructions can be
 c

 adapted for use with other software.
 80 Collect both the raw luminescence detecting data and the drug screen layout in Microsoft Excel
 (Supplementary Fig. 2a).
 81 Calculate the average luminescence value of the negative and positive control wells of the drug
 screen plate (Supplementary Fig. 2b). Be aware that, when different normalization reagents are used
 for different drugs used in the same plate, separate negative controls should be used.
 82 Calculate the Z-factor of each drug-screening plate using the following formula:

 3  standard deviationðnegative controlÞ þ 3  standard deviationð positive controlÞ
 Z factor ¼ 1 
 averageðnegative controlÞ  averageð positive controlÞ

 The Z-factor expresses the technical noise in a plate to the total range of values obtained between
 positive and negative controls. Therefore, the Z-factor can be used as an indication of screening
 quality. As a rule of thumb, use data only if the obtained Z-factor is >0.4. Organoid screens often
 show Z-factors of ≥0.7 (Supplementary Fig. 2c).

 83 Set the positive control to 0% viability, and deﬁne the negative (vehicle only) control as 100% by
 calculating viability for each well as follows:

 ðwell value  average positive controlÞ
 well viability ¼  100%
 average vehicle control  average positive control

 (Supplementary Fig. 2d).
 84 To visualize the data, transfer results to software such as GraphPad Prism (Supplementary Fig. 3).
 For this, generate a new Prism ﬁle containing an XY table and graph, and select the appropriate
 number of replicates (Supplementary Fig. 3b).
 85 Load data into Prism (Supplementary Fig. 3b). Transfer the viability percentages of all individual
 wells to the newly generated Prism table. Add the log-transformed drug concentrations in the ﬁrst
 row of the table.
 86 Set graph parameters (Supplementary Fig. 3c) by selecting the appropriate graph type (XY), setting
 error bars (we use s.e.m.) and setting graph origin (we use lower left).
 87 Add a trendline to the newly generated graph (Supplementary Fig. 3d). Choose the option ‘log
 (inhibitor) vs normalized response -variable slope’ to create a kill curve.
 88 Compare different organoid lines by comparing IC50 values (Supplementary Fig. 3e) or AUC,
 depending on the shape of the kill curve. For some compounds (such as the anti-EGFR antibody
 cetuximab), kill curves do not show a sigmoid shape, which makes the calculation of IC50 values
 difﬁcult. In that case, AUC values allow comparison between different lines.
 89 To calculate AUC, select AUC calculation in the ‘Analysis’ tab (Supplementary Fig. 3f). (Optional)
 Alternatively, if a day 3 measurement is performed (see optional Step 55, measuring ATP values of
 untreated organoids at the start of therapy exposure), GR metrics can be calculated instead or in
 addition to IC50/AUC values. GR metrics correct for proliferation rate, thereby generally resulting
 in more reproducible sensitivity measurements36. Calculation of these metrics cannot be performed
 in GraphPad Prism and requires an analysis as described elsewhere36. Differences between IC50,
 AUC and GR metrics are discussed in more depth in Anticipated results and discussion.

Troubleshooting
See Table 4 for troubleshooting guidance.

 Step Problem Possible reason Solution

 11 BME drops fuse when plated Drops are too big or too close to each other Plate a smaller volume of BME per well. If still soluble, the
 in the plate BME can be removed from the plate using the same
 pipette used for dispensing and plated in a clean, not
 previously used plate. It should be noted that occasional
 fusion of droplets does not negatively affect organoid
 outgrowth
 BME drops ﬂatten out on the Culture plates were not properly pre- Use only plates that have been overnight in the incubator.
 surface of the culture plate heated When no culture plates are pre-heated, plates can be
 during plating warmed for 1 h at 60 °C, followed by a 30-min incubation
 at 37 °C to allow the plates to cool off before organoids
 are plated
 16 No or poor organoid Tissue was left dry for too long before This is dependent on the quality of the tissue that is
 outgrowth sampling or contained too few obtained. Try to obtain sufﬁcient epithelium from the
 epithelial cells pathology department, and ensure that the sample is
 transferred to culture medium as soon as possible
 BME/Matrigel is dissolved In some cases, this occurs in the ﬁrst 24 h Collect material from the culture plate, wash once with
 overnight after initial plating after plating primary cells. This could, for adDMEM/F12+++ medium and replate pellet in fresh
 example, be due to insufﬁcient dilution of BME/Matrigel. Let BME/Matrigel solidify, and add medium
 the trypsin used for tissue digestion, or containing caspofungin, Primocin and ROCK inhibitor
 because primary cells have released according to the protocol
 proteases that have resulted in the
 digestion of the BME

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 Step Problem Possible reason Solution

 20 Organoids are hard to Organoids were left to grow into large Use a plugged glass Pasteur pipette with an opening that
 disrupt during splitting structures, resulting in keratinization and, has been narrowed by holding it in a ﬂame to increase
 hence, structures that are very hard to disruption efﬁciency. If this results in a mixture of large
 disrupt fragments and small fragments/single cells, use a ﬁlter to
 remove the large fragments before replating
 54 Loss of organoids during Organoids stuck to the tubing of the After the PBS step, ﬂush tubing with adDMEM/F12+++
 dispensing into 384-well cell dispenser, or organoids sunk to the bottom medium before loading organoids. Before priming, invert
 culture plates of the stock tube before dispensation the tube containing organoids that will be dispensed three
 times to ensure homogeneous distribution of organoids
 throughout the solution. After priming, immediately
 proceed to dispense; do not wait, since this will result in
 organoids sinking to the bottom of the tube and not being
 dispensed
 Organoids do not survive the Organoids die during processing/ If this occurs, always repeat the screen to see if this occurs
 drug screening (where they dispensing into 384-well cell culture plates again. In our hands, this has occurred on occasion, but
 are cultured in 5% (vol/vol) then, once the screen was repeated, this did not occur.
 BME/Matrigel) This indicates that it is probably caused by ineffective
 processing of the culture. For example, organoids were
 kept on ice for too long during the processing of the
 organoid culture before they could be dispensed in the
 384-well cell culture plate. When re-trying, work quickly
 Some patient-derived cultures (in our So far, we have found only one culture that could not be
 hands <5%), simply cannot grow under the screened in suspension. For these cultures, the percentage
 suspension culture conditions with 5% of BME/Matrigel used could be increased to 10%, as this
 (vol/vol) BME used for drug screening as might help the culture to survive. However, be cautious
 described in this protocol when comparing these screening results with cultures that
 were screened in different percentages of BME/Matrigel
 Screening results are not Different batches of medium or BME/ Make a large batch of medium that can be stored in
 reproducible when repeated Matrigel aliquots (ensure that this does not contain growth factors
 that are not stable in this solution at −20 °C, and divide
 into aliquots so that the same batch of growth factors is
 always used when an aliquot of medium is thawed and
 prepped for culturing). This ensures that the same batch of
 growth factors is used throughout all experiments. For
 BME/Matrigel, always use the same lot for all screens so
 that changes in concentrations of ECM proteins do not
 affect the screening outcome
 Different passage rates (organoids were Minimize variation in the experimental setup. For example,
 not passaged the same number of hours make sure that organoids are always passaged at a ﬁxed
 before starting the screen) time on day 0, so that when organoids are plated for drug
 screening, they have been in culture for the same number
 of hours after passaging when the experiment is repeated

Timing
 Steps 1–5, collection and preparation of primary human tissue: 1–24 h
 Steps 6–16, establishment of organoids from primary tissue: 2 h
 Steps 17–25, splitting of organoids: 1 h
 Steps 26–35, (optional) freezing of organoids: 30 min–1 h
 Steps 36–42, (optional) thawing of cryopreserved organoids: 1 h
 Steps 43–50, preparation of organoid solution for dispensation into screening plates: day 3, 1.5 h
 Steps 51–57, dispensation of organoids: day 3, 20 min
 Steps 58–68, addition of chemotherapeutics into culture plate: day 3, 20–30 min
 Steps 69–74, (optional) radiation of organoids in 384-well cell culture plate format: day 4, 10–20 min
 Steps 75–79, cell-viability readout of drug-screening plates: day 7, 45 min
 Steps 80–89, analysis of drug-screening results: day 7 or later, 45 min

Anticipated results
 Establishment of organoid lines
 Using this protocol, we have obtained an outgrowth efﬁciency of 70% for both normal organoids
 obtained from tumor-adjacent epithelium and tumor organoids from resection or biopsy specimens

 from patients diagnosed with HNSCC. Before we implemented the addition of caspofungin to the
 culture medium of primary cultures, organoid cultures were regularly lost by fungal infections that
 occurred mainly in laryngeal and pharyngeal biopsies (even when cultured in medium containing
 both penicillin-streptomycin and Primocin), decreasing the outgrowth efﬁciency.
 We have not yet found an effective method for inducing organoid outgrowth from the remaining
 30% of samples. There are various possible reasons for lack of organoid outgrowth from this subset of
 samples, including suboptimal sampling, insufﬁcient monitoring of primary cultures, suboptimal
 seeding density, absence of culture medium components that might be required for a subset of tumors
 such as conditioned media (when used) or speciﬁcities of the samples (such as donating patients who
 were treated with chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy shortly before sampling). To make sampling as
 efﬁcient as possible, a quick transfer of patient material into the collection culture medium is advised
 (see Step 1). This will prevent the tissue from drying out and will probably result in more efﬁcient
 outgrowth. Therefore, when setting up organoid cultures in a new hospital or institute, it is important
 to integrate sample collection as efﬁciently as possible into the hospital logistics. In addition, sampling
 from viable, epithelial-rich tumor areas (no necrotic or ﬁbrotic areas) will increase the chance of
 successful organoid establishment (see Step 2). After initial plating, we recommend the organoid
 culture be monitored daily. In some cases, the BME is dissolved overnight after plating primary tissue,
 resulting in release of epithelial cells/clumps of cells from the ECM. If left unattended, the epithelial
 cells will not grow out into organoids and will eventually die. In these cases, collection of material
 from the culture plate, washing, centrifuging and replating in fresh BME solved the problem.

 Linking in vitro organoid drug-screening results with clinical data
 Using the drug-screening approach described in this article, the response to a range of therapeutic
 agents can be determined for organoids derived from different donors. This has allowed us to
 compare the drug responses between cells derived from different patients. Depending on the therapy
 used, IC50 values (Fig. 3e and f), AUC values or GR metrics can be used to quantify drug responses
 and thereby allow the comparison between different lines. In the data presented here, for example, it
 was found that the organoid lines derived from donor A tissue was much more sensitive to the
 PIK3CA-inhibitor alpelisib than the organoid line derived from donor M tissue.
 Others have already shown that, in some tumor types, organoid responses in vitro can predict
 patient clinical responses. A study published in 2018 revealed a correlation between organoid and
 clinical response in colorectal cancer patients30. A more recent study conﬁrmed that organoids have
 predictive potential in this patient group. Interestingly, this study indicated that organoids could
 predict the response to irinotecan-based therapy, but not to 5-ﬂuorouracil plus oxaliplatin32. The
 authors additionally proposed that responders could still be distinguished from non-responders when
 using fewer cells than they used. This would enable screening results to be obtained in only 2 weeks,
 making such an assay suitable for clinical implementation. It will be interesting to see if the con-
 ditions deﬁned for their minimized assay can be validated in an independent data set.
 Similar results have been obtained for organoids derived from pancreatic and breast cancers,
 although with much smaller patient cohorts9,11. In our recent publication, we show that the response
 of HNSCC-derived organoids to radiotherapy was predictive of patient response to this treatment
 (although numbers were small)19. The observed correlation between organoid and patient response
 requires validation in larger patient cohorts. Nonetheless, if this holds true, patient-derived organoids
 may have application in personalized medicine to select the right drug for the right patient. Such a
 functional selection of effective therapies for the individual patient is desired, since many new
 targeted agents are currently in clinical trial. Organoids could thus serve both as a tool to identify
 responders and as a tool to identify or validate potential biomarkers, by comparing responder and
 non-responder organoid cultures, respectively.

 Challenges for the future: determining the predictive potential of organoids
 It remains to be determined whether in vitro sensitivity to a drug is actually predictive of a clinical
 response of the patient to that same drug. Recent data suggest that this might actually vary depending
 on the therapy tested32. Currently, we are awaiting more studies that investigate the predictive
 potential of organoids. It will be of interest to see how this ﬁeld develops over the coming years. As
 previously discussed, the variability in screening setup, diversity of therapies tested and variability in
 clinical parameters available to assess clinical responses complicate the comparison of different
 studies. To further characterize tumor-speciﬁc sensitivities to drugs and possible adverse effects on

PROTOCOL NATURE PROTOCOLS

 healthy tissue, one may also consider incorporating patient-matched normal organoids into the drug
 screenings19. However, normal organoid cultures may be rather heterogeneous with respect to the
 ratio of stem cells to differentiated cells and also display a high expansion rate, as most normal
 organoid growth media favor an undifferentiated and proliferative state of the cultures. Therefore, the
 response of wild-type organoids to chemotherapeutics targeting proliferating cells (i.e., not targeted
 therapies that should affect only cells carrying speciﬁc tumor-speciﬁc genetic alterations) may not
 always be indicative of the response of healthy tissues in vivo.
 If organoid drug screens are introduced in the future to guide clinical decision making, the quality
 of the drug-screening assays used for this need to be ensured. Internal controls are essential to be
 conﬁdent screening results are reproducible over time. Previous work has shown that drug responses
 in HNSCC-derived organoids were reproducible when repeated 3 months apart19. For example, a
 control organoid for which the response to the therapeutic agents tested is already known could be
 used as a control on each plate. To systematically test the quality of each individual assay plate, Z-
 factor scores should be calculated. Z-factor scores are a measure of assay quality, where a higher score
 indicates a more robust assay. Only plates with a Z-factor above a certain cutoff value would then be
 included. Generally, a cutoff value of 0.4 is used. In our previous screenings, we have obtained an
 average of Z-factor scores of 0.719, indicating that drug screening in patient-derived organoids is
 robust and could potentially be further optimized to meet clinical standards. Studies of screening
 optimization have given valuable insights for screening optimization, including the use of plate seals
 to prevent edge effects69. Such alterations might further improve assay robustness and thereby aid
 implementation of organoid therapy screens in clinical decision making. Although beyond the scope
 of this article, these questions need to be addressed in the future and will require standardization of
 assays and culture conditions for patient-derived materials that meet European Medicines
 Agency and US Food and Drug Administration standards, if organoid-based screens are introduced
 into the clinic.
