18 Thaw an appropriate number of Matrigel aliquots in a 4 °C fridge (1.2 ml Matrigel is required for a full 24-well plate of organoids droplets). Thaw 1.2 ml additional Matrigel in case a higher split ratio will be used.
CRITICAL Matrigel needs to be thawed before Step 27. Thaw extra Matrigel ahead in case higher splitting ratio is needed in Step 27.
19 Prepare colon organoid growth medium (15 ml for every 24-well plate) by first making up base medium, as described in Table 2, and then using this as a component of colon organoid growth medium, made as described in Table 3.
20 Collect organoid droplets using the medium in which they are currently growing. Using a 1,000 µl pipette, set the pipette to 650 µl (there should be a maximum volume in each well of 50 µl Matrigel and 600 µl medium). Scrape the bottom of the well with the pipette tip to dislodge the Matrigel droplets.
21 Transfer the medium containing the Matrigel droplets to a 15 ml conical tube. Repeat for each well to collect all Matrigel droplets per 24-well plate of organoid droplets collected.
22 Aspirate the supernatant (spent organoid growth medium) with vacuum using a sterile Pasteur pipette.
23 Resuspend the Matrigel pellet in CRS using a 1:10 dilution. For a full 24-well plate of organoids, use 12 ml of CRS. Resuspend the Matrigel droplet by gently inverting the 15 ml conical tube.
CRITICAL Do not resuspend the droplet by repeated pipetting as organoid will adhere to the serological pipette and there might be some organoid loss.
c
24 Incubate the resuspended Matrigel in the ice bucket for 45–60 min, or until Matrigel is dissolved. Mix the Matrigel–CRS solution via gentle inversion every 10–15 min. Organoids will settle at the bottom of the tube when Matrigel is fully dissolved.
CRITICAL Do not exceed 60 min of incubation as this can decrease cell viability. Do not vortex the organoid suspension.
c
25 Centrifuge at 1,000g for 5 min at 4 °C. After centrifugation, there should be a noticeable organoid pellet, ~200 µl volume of organoid, depending on the density of the original culture. During centrifugation, prepare the material for the subsequent steps: sterilize a glass dish with PREempt disinfectant solution and 70% ethanol. Add ice to 50–70% capacity of the glass dish, spray with 70% ethanol again and place the dish into the biosafety cabinet. Put Matrigel aliquots into the aluminum cooling block. Spray thoroughly with 70% ethanol, and place it into the glass dish containing the ice.
CRITICAL Ice is not sterile; use with extra caution in the biosafety cabinet.
c
26 Aspirate CRS using vacuum and a sterile Pasteur pipette. After aspiration, place the conical tube into the glass dish containing ice.
CRITICAL Remove the CRS as much as possible, as remaining CRS could decrease the cell viability and compromise the integrity of the Matrigel matrix.
c
27 Calculate the volume needed for the desired splitting ratio allowing 50 μl of Matrigel per well (i.e., 1.2 ml Matrigel per 24-well plate). A typical splitting ratio is 1:3 to 1:5, but this varies and depends on the density of the original culture, length of culture since original thaw, and donor intrinsic growth behavior.
28 Keep the tube on ice, and resuspend the organoid pellet in a maximum of 1 ml of Matrigel. If the total volume required is <1 ml, add the required volume; for example, if 900 µl is needed to achieve the desired splitting ratio, add 900 µl.
CRITICAL Initially, 1 ml is added since a larger volume makes it harder to dissociate the organoids and leads to a more diverse organoid fragment size.
c
29 Bend a 1,000 µl pipette tip by pressing down the pipette tip on the inside of the cap for the conical tube.
30 Once organoids have been fragmented, add the remaining Matrigel needed (calculated in Step 27) to achieve the desired passaging ratio. Mix the Matrigel–organoid fragment suspension well before proceeding to the next step.
31 Seed 50 µl droplets of the fragment suspension into each well of an Olympus 24-well, tissue culture treated plate.
CRITICAL It is important to use Olympus 24-well, tissue culture treated plates as they maintain spherical Matrigel droplets, which are critical for 3D organoid growth. Using Falcon tissue culture treated plates results in the spreading and flattening of the Matrigel droplet. Alternatively, Falcon non-tissue culture treated plates may be used, but as these do not allow adhesion of the droplets, there is a high risk of the Matrigel droplets dislodging from the well and being aspirated when changing media.
