Protocol

been unclear whether significant single-guide RNA (sgRNA) enrichment or depletion could be
maintained in organoid and assembloid models that require long-term differentiation.
 Through combining neural organoid and assembloid models with CRISPR–Cas9 screening,
we systematically assessed the impact of 425 NDD-associated genes on interneuron generation
and migration into cortical circuits16. Specifically, we established a reporter hiPS cell line that
labels interneurons and applied it in both organoid and assembloid models. In organoids,
we assessed interneuron generation, and in assembloids, we assessed interneuron migration
into cortical circuits. By comparing sgRNA enrichment and depletion across interneuron
populations in these contexts, our analysis identified 46 genes (~11% of genes screened) that
significantly disrupted interneuron development. We validated several of these hits and
found results consistent with the screen, demonstrating that significant sgRNA enrichment or
depletion can be reliably maintained long term in both organoid and assembloid models. These
findings underscore the utility of this CRISPR-assembloid platform in mapping NDD-associated
genes to specific developmental processes and uncovering the mechanisms of disease.
 Here, we present a detailed protocol for integrating pooled CRISPR–Cas9 screening with
neural organoids and assembloids to study human interneuron generation (i.e., interneuron
generation screen) and migration to the developing cortex (i.e., interneuron migration screen).
The protocol outlines key steps for applying CRISPR screening in 3D organoid cultures,
addressing challenges such as culture variability and extended culture duration. In addition,
this protocol includes a practical workflow for generating knockout (KO) cell lines for screen
hits, enabling downstream functional validations.

Overview of the procedure
Our protocol for pooled CRISPR screening in neural organoids and assembloids can be divided
into five sections (Fig. 2a,b). Section 1 begins with the transduction of hiPS cells by using
lentivirus carrying sgRNAs, which also encodes mCherry to label infected cells, followed by
the maintenance of transduced hiPS cells to achieve gene perturbation. This is followed by
section 2, which describes the generation of hSO from genetically modified hiPS cells. We also
provide details on the generation of hCO for use in the migration screen. Section 3 describes
steps for isolating cells from parallel screens for interneuron generation and migration. This
involves the use of engineered hiPS cells to stably express eGFP under the control of a previously
validated Dlxi1/2b enhancer, which labels ganglionic eminence-derived cells5,17. Section 4 covers
sequencing and data analysis to curate a list of candidate genes. Finally, section 5 details the
functional validation of gene hits.

a b
 Section 1, hiPS cell transduction and gene perturbation
 GFP– cells
 FACS

 Lenti
 L e sgRNAs GFP+ cells
 Section 2, generation of hSO with genetically perturbed hiPS cells
 Interneuron generation screen
 mCherry+

 FACS hCO
 Section 3, selection hSO
 hS
 SO FACS
 hiPS cells expressing
 Cas9 & Dlxi1/2b::eGFP hCO GFP+ cells

 Cut
 Section 4, gDNA extraction, PCR, sequencing and data analysis
 hFA hSO FACS
 hSO GFP+ cells

 Section 5, validation of individual candidates Control hiPS cells hCO

 t

 Interneuron migration screen

screens in hFA. b, Schematic showing the detailed steps of the interneuron from ref. 16, Springer Nature.
generation and migration screens. The inset illustrates migration of hSO-derived
