Protocol

 a b c d
 Dlxi1/2b::eGFP– Dlxi1/2b::eGFP+

 Negative 0.078%
 control

 hSO 33.1%

 0 104 106
 1 mm 1 mm 1 mm
 GFP

 e 40
 f g
Dlxi1/2b::eGFP+ cells

 30
 Percentage of

 20

 10

 0
 hSO

 h i
 hSO
 CTL CAG::Cas9;Dlxi1/2::eGFP
 hCO hSO
 hCO
 hFA

 300 µm 1 mm

 b, Neural spheroid formation in the AggreWell plate after 24 h of culturing. c, Representative image of neural spheroids after
 being dislodged and transfered into a 100-mm ultra-low-attachment plate. d, Flow cytometry analysis of the percentage of
 Dlxi1/2b::eGFP+ cells in hSO. Representative histograms of flow cytometry analysis of 45-d hSO. The negative control is hSO
 without GFP expression. The x-axis shows the fluorescence intensity of GFP, and the y-axis shows cell counts. e, Percentage
 of Dlxi1/2b::GFP+ cells in hSO derived from a control hiPS cell line. Each dot represents the data from an individual hSO.
 Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. f, One hCO and one hSO were transferred into a well of a 24-well low-attachment plate
 to generate an hFA. g, After setting up the hFA, the plate was tilted in the incubator to facilitate hFA formation. h, Schematic
 and representative image of the hFA at 30 d after assembly. The hSO was derived from the CAG::Cas9;Dlxi1/2b::eGFP hiPS
 cell line. i, Representative image showing hFA transferred to a plate for separation of the hCO from the hSO. CTL, control.
 Panels d and e adapted with permission, and panel h reproduced with permission from ref. 16, Springer Nature.

 of the developmental stage of the culture, by using the lowest effective enzyme concentration
 and the shortest possible incubation duration. For day-45 hSO dissociation, we used 10 U ml−1
 papain with a 15-min incubation. For ~day-75 hSO dissociation, we used 30 U ml−1 papain
 with a 45-min incubation. In addition, we included a step to remove debris generated during
 dissociation. It is important to adapt the dissociation method to the specific multicellular
 preparation used.

 Length of the screen
 Optimizing the screen duration can influence the signal-to-noise ratio. For screens focused on
 the generation of a specific cell type, it is important to first establish the time course of cell type
 development. Experimental readout should be conducted at an early time point to maximize
 the signal-to-noise ratio.

 General considerations for culturing hiPS cell–derived neural organoids
 • Genome integrity of hiPS cells should be verified by single-nucleotide polymorphism or
 comparative genomic hybridization arrays after genetic engineering.
