Protocol

KO to compound heterozygous KO or heterozygous KO. This can obscure phenotype-genotype
associations, particularly for genes with dosage-sensitive effects. Follow-up validation using
isogenic homozygous or heterozygous KO lines is critical for clarifying the effect of complete or
partial loss of the candidate genes.
 Moreover, organoids, despite mimicking many aspects of the developing brain, lack
vascularization and cross-talk between brain regions28. Assembloid generation is laborious,
limiting some readouts and large-scale studies. Moreover, these studies are long, often
requiring >10 weeks of in vitro differentiation. Despite these challenges, this protocol provides
a powerful tool for exploring complex neurodevelopmental processes in a human-relevant
context.

Experimental design
Validation of Cas9 expression
In this protocol, we use a hiPS cell line that stably expresses Cas9 under a Tet-off system, for
which we validated gene-editing efficiency by using a GFP self-cutting assay16. We and others
have observed that Cas9 function may vary in postmitotic cells29. Therefore, we maintained in
culture the virus-infected hiPS cells (with sgRNA and Cas9 expression) for ~10 d to ensure gene
editing. For experiments editing postmitotic cells, including neurons, it is crucial to validate
Cas9 function in the cell type of interest.

Designing the readout of the screen
A critical aspect of CRISPR screening is determining the readout of the screen and the time
point to perform the experimental readout for the phenotype or biological process being
studied. In the protocol presented here, we focused on both interneuron generation and
migration in the forebrain. To track interneurons, we engineered a hiPS cell line to stably
express eGFP under the control of a previously validated Dlxi1/2b enhancer, which labels
the medial ganglionic eminence–derived cell lineage5,17. Consequently, interneurons in the
hSO were marked as Dlxi1/2b::eGFP+. For the interneuron generation screen, we assessed the
relative enrichment of sgRNAs for each targeted gene by comparing sorted Dlxi1/2b::eGFP+
and Dlxi1/2b::eGFP− populations in hSO. To minimize screen duration while still capturing
lineage specification, we performed this comparison immediately after the patterning phase
of hSO differentiation, when ~25% of the cells in the hSO should have acquired an interneuron
identity (Fig. 3d,e). For the interneuron migration screen, we evaluated the relative enrichment
of sgRNAs for each targeted gene in migrated and non-migrated Dlxi1/2b::eGFP+ cells in hFA.
On the basis of our empirical observations, we conducted this comparison on samples that
were collected 30 d after assembly to ensure enough migrated interneurons for downstream
analysis.

Library representation
Maintaining sufficient library representation is essential for ensuring the reproducibility
of a pooled CRISPR screen30, especially considering inter-hiPS cell line variability for neural
organoid generation31. In practice, the actual library representation for a given screen may be
lower than theoretically calculated, particularly in long-term cultures that model dynamic
developmental processes. When resources permit, increasing library representation can help
mitigate these challenges and improve the robustness of the screen.

Minimization of organoid fusion
During neural induction, differentiation and patterning, neural organoids tend to fuse with
each other32. To improve culture quality, we routinely separate fused organoids33, or one can
incorporate xanthan gum polymers to avoid fusion34. Large organoid clusters can impede
cellular growth and result in unwanted cell death.

Minimization of cell death during dissociation
Harsh dissociation of organoids and assembloids can induce cell death, especially in long-term
cultures. To minimize this, we optimized papain concentration and incubation time on the basis
