Protocol


Applications
This protocol combines pooled CRISPR KO screening with hiPS cell–derived neural organoids
and assembloids to provide a versatile platform for investigating the genetic regulation of
neural development. Although it specifically focuses on interneuron development, the protocol
studying interneuron generation can be adapted to studying various developmental processes,
including corticogenesis, gliogenesis and cell-type specification in regions such as the
striatum18, thalamus19 and cerebellum20. The protocol for studying interneuron migration into
the dorsal forebrain may also be adapted to study integration of interneurons into circuits or
the genetic regulation of the migration of other cell types. To adapt the protocol for alternative
applications, reporter hiPS cell lines for the cell type of interest are needed. Experimental
readouts should then be adapted to the biological process of interest.
 By targeting specific groups of genes or through unbiased genome-wide screens, this
approach enables the systematic identification of key regulators involved in diverse biological
processes. Although this protocol focuses on neural organoids and assembloids derived from
hiPS cells, it can be adapted for human embryonic stem cell–derived cultures. The use of neural
organoids and assembloids derived from human cells captures the unique human context of
disease21,22. This makes the protocol particularly powerful for studying the genetic basis of
neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism, epilepsy and schizophrenia.

Comparison with other methods
Among existing approaches, pooled CRISPR screening with 2D hiPS23–25 cell–derived neuronal
cells has been widely used because of their scalability and shorter differentiation time. This
format is particularly useful for assessing basic cellular phenotypes such as viability and
proliferation. These 2D cultures, however, often involve the direct conversion of hiPS cells into
terminally differentiated cell types, which precludes the modeling of intermediate stages of
development. In addition, these cultures are more homogeneous in terms of cell composition,
limiting their use for studying cell-cell interactions, such as interneuron migration. Neural
organoids and assembloids, on the other hand, are suitable for conducting research focused
on investigating the complex developmental processes involving diverse cell-cell interaction.
The combination of CRSIPR-based perturbation with single-cell RNA sequencing26 enables
the profiling of transcriptional consequences due to gene perturbation. This illustrates how
a gene perturbation alters cellular identity, differentiation trajectories or gene regulatory
networks. However, this strategy is technically demanding, requiring high-quality single-cell
RNA sequencing data and sufficient coverage for each perturbation, and therefore limiting
the throughput of the experiment. The approach that we present here relies on genomic DNA
sequencing of bulk samples and therefore can be scaled up to genome-wide screening. In
addition, coupling CRISPR screening with phenotypic assessments allows one to study specific
biological processes, which can be difficult to infer from RNA profiles alone.

Limitations
There are a number of limitations to consider while designing and interpreting results from the
pooled CRISPR KO screen in human neural organoids and assembloids.
 First, the off-target effects of sgRNAs can result in unintended gene perturbations and
confounding phenotypes. To minimize this, we recommend using multiple independent
sgRNAs per gene and validating top candidate genes individually with orthogonal approaches.
 Second, variability between hiPS cell lines and their insufficient benchmarking can
influence differentiation potential, gene expression profiles, and responses to genetic
perturbations, thereby affecting the reproducibility and generalizability of the screen. Carefully
validating the pluripotency and genome integrity of hiPS cell lines is essential27. Conducting
screens across multiple hiPS cell lines can improve robustness. In addition, validating top
candidates across multiple hiPS cell lines ensures broader relevance. Batch-to-batch variability
in organoid cultures can also introduce technical noise; therefore, quality-control steps at
multiple stages of differentiation and across biological replicates is essential.
 Third, the heterogeneous nature of gene disruption in pooled CRISPR screens can
complicate genotype-phenotype correlations. Editing outcomes may range from homozygous

Nature Protocols 4
