Protocol


Introduction

There are multiple human-specific aspects of telencephalic brain development that
are difficult or impossible to recapitulate in animal models, including protracted
neurodevelopment, extensive diversity and complexity of human brain cells, expression
of human-specific genes and gene networks, and distinct functional properties of human
neurons and neural networks1–7. Moreover, genetic abnormalities detected in patients with
neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders may alter the human-specific aspects of
neurodevelopment; therefore, human-based models are needed to study human brain
development under normal and pathological conditions8,9.
 Primary human fetal brain tissue obtained from terminated pregnancies has been
effectively used to study early stages of fetal human telencephalic brain development10–13.
These studies identified human-specific brain cells and characterized the cell type-specific
genes and gene networks associated with the specification and development of these cells.
In parallel, postmortem brain tissue from patients is utilized to identify cells and molecular
pathways that are disrupted in the adult human cortex in association with various brain
disorders14–16. However, important limitations of these approaches include that fetal brain tissue
is rarely available from patients with specific genetic abnormalities, and neither the fetal nor
adult tissues are amenable to genetic manipulations in long-term mechanistic experiments.
 To overcome these limitations, new methods and protocols have been developed to
differentiate and reprogram human embryonic and induced pluripotent stem (PS) cells into
different types of telencephalic neural cell, including neural progenitors, excitatory and
inhibitory neurons, and glial cells, in vitro17–23. The use of these approaches in research has
allowed the discovery as well as genetic manipulation of the properties of patient-specific
neural cells and the identification of disease-related phenotypes and mechanisms. However,
despite many advantages of two-dimensional cultures in mechanistic experiments, they are
not well-suited for neurodevelopment as they lack other telencephalic cell types and specific
organization present during brain development.
 Self-organized telencephalic brain tissues, collectively termed telencephalic brain
organoids here, recapitulate many important aspects of fetal human telencephalic
development, including cell-type specification, development and organization, and have
already been used for disease modeling24–29, leading to new insights into the cellular and
molecular mechanisms of human brain development in health and disease (reviewed in
refs. 8,9,30–36). Although the overall enthusiasm for studying human brain development
using brain organoids is on the rise, the approach has several notable limitations—including
the variability of cellular composition and organization37, impaired specification of humanspecific neural progenitors and late-born superficial layer cortical neurons38, as well as
disrupted cortical lamination39 and impaired functional maturation of neurons and neural
networks37,40–42—which limit the use of organoids in research.
 In contrast to many of these previous methods, which include multiple neural rosettes (NRs)
per organoid, we recently developed a method for generating telencephalic brain organoids
from human stem cell-derived single neural rosettes (SNRs)43. NRs are spontaneously organized
three-dimensional multicellular structures that resemble a cross-section of the neural tube and
emerge in vitro upon the successful differentiation of PS cells into neuroectodermal lineage
cells44–46. We demonstrated that starting organoid formation from SNRs leads to predictably
organized telencephalic organoids with reproducible cellular composition and functional
neural networks. Unlike other brain organoid models, SNR-derived organoids contain both
pallial and subpallial lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE)-like neural progenitors, cortical and
striatal neurons, as well as periendothelial and ependymal cells. Here, we outline the rationale
behind generating organoids from isolated SNRs and discuss the advantages, limitations
and potential applications of this method. We also detail the experimental procedures for
generating SNR-derived organoids from control and CRISPR–Cas9-edited stem cell lines
and their use for single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), immunohistochemistry and slice
patch-clamp electrophysiology.

Nature Protocols | Volume 21 | February 2026 | 718–748 719
