38 Fix vascular networks (option A) or grow and ﬁx vascular organoids (option B).
(B) Establishment of blood vessel organoids and preparation for staining
(i) For blood vessel organoid cultures, liberate the entire matrix from the well bottom, using
the round end of a sterile spatula. Move the spatula toward the well center along the
bottom of the well until the gel is freely ﬂoating.
(ii) Under sterile conditions, transfer the gel with a sterile lab spoon to the lid of a 10-cm dish
(Fig. 2j). Cover the lid with the 10-cm plate bottom and proceed to a horizontal laminar
flow station equipped with a stereomicroscope.
(iii) Use two sterile 30-gauge needles to cut out single blood vessel networks and try to reduce
the amount of excessive matrix surrounding the organoids (as shown in Supplementary
Video 1). Depending on initial seeding densities, you should expect a full 96-well plate of
organoids from 2 to 3 wells of a 12-well plate.
(iv) Transfer single organoids (using a cut P1000 tip) to a 6-well low-attachment plate and add
5 mL of StemPro-34 SFM complete medium including 15% FBS, 100 ng/mL VEGF-A and
100 ng/mL FGF-2 and incubate the organoids.
(v) One day after separating the blood vessel networks (d11), use a cut P1000 tip to transfer
single organoids to low-attachment round-bottom 96-well ultra-low-attachment plates.
Add fresh StemPro-34 SFM complete medium including 15% FBS, 100 ng/mL VEGF-A
and 100 ng/mL FGF-2. Around 4 d later (d15), blood vessel organoids should show a
round and fully encapsulated morphology (Fig. 2k–m).
CRITICAL STEP Prolonged culture of multiple blood vessel organoids together in one
well will lead to fusion of organoids. If fusion occurs early in culture, vascular organoids
can still be separated with two P200 tips.
(vi) Proceed to ﬁx and analyze the vascular organoids as described in the next step. Once
conﬁdent the differentiation efﬁciency is adequate (by assessing CD31 and PDGRF-β stainings
in a whole-mount staining protocol or by FACS analysis), you can also transplant blood vessel
organoids into the kidney capsule.
