Protocol


to perform. Initially, it might be difficult to identify a SNR using a stereoscope and to perform a
clean SNR isolation. Thus, it is expected that some initially isolated SNR-containing tissue may
contain no SNRs, a small SNR or multiple rosettes (Fig. 4). Such isolations will probably fail to
grow or transform into multi-lumen-containing organoids.
 We observed that the size and shape of SNRs varies substantially even within a
single well. We most often isolate SNRs that are at least 200 μm in diameter with a
clearly distinguishable single lumen without taking the shapes of the lumen and rosette
into consideration. Thus, isolated SNRs are of slightly different sizes (mean ± s.e.m. of
297 ± 3 μm; 95% confidence interval: 290.6–303.3) and shapes. These factors could potentially
influence the identities and distribution of cells in SNR-derived organoids. Recently, new
methods have been developed for generating uniform SNRs with a defined size and shape
using spatially confined micropatterned substrates69,70. We foresee that these innovations
can be adapted to enhance the efficiency of generating uniform SNR-derived organoids
and to explore the effects of SNR size and shape on the properties and organization of cells
in organoids.
 Another potential limitation is non-uniform lamination of organoid tissue. Although
we found regions in organoid sections with predictably organized neural cells, the
organization was not uniform throughout the organoid. Instead, we observed regions
with unclear or no organization43. Those areas, however, were readily identifiable by visual
inspection of a slice or section and were excluded from investigations involving imaging
and electrophysiology experiments. The impact of disorganized areas on overall organoid
development remains unclear.
 Other limitations are common to most organoid generation protocols34, including the
absence of vasculature to allow oxygen and nutrient delivery inside of the organoids, the lack of
microglia to regulate the number of cells and synapses in organoids and the absence of neuronal
inputs from the sensory organs and other brain regions to recapitulate information flow in
complex brain networks. Recently, xenotransplantation of human organoids into the rodent
brain has been used to overcome some of these limitations79–82.

Experimental design
The organoid generation protocol consists of five stages (Fig. 1): (1) PS cell maintenance and
propagation, (2) neural induction, (3) NR formation and isolation, (4) organoid formation
from isolated SNRs and (5) organoid maturation. The rationale for each stage is discussed
in the preceding section. Here, we provide an overview of these five stages and additional
considerations regarding the protocol and experimental procedures that we perform with
SNR-derived organoids, including the generation of CRISPR–Cas9-engineered human stem
cells with large genetic deletions (Box 1 and Fig. 6), scRNA-seq (Fig. 7), immunohistochemistry
(Fig. 8) and slice patch-clamp electrophysiology (Fig. 9).

Stage 1: PS cell maintenance and propagation (Steps 1–21)
This section details the steps for thawing and passaging PS cells. It is essential to use validated
and characterized human stem cell lines. Insufficiently characterized lines may lead to
irreproducible results. We recommend following the standards for use of human stem cells
in research recently released by the International Society for Stem Cell Research83. Wellcharacterized human stem cell lines produced from healthy control individuals and patients
with various genetic abnormalities are now available from multiple sources, including WiCell,
Allen Institute for Cell Sciences, National Institute of Mental Health, Simons Foundation Autism
Research Initiative and California Institute for Regenerative Medicine. For disease modeling
studies, we recommend always including isogenic engineered lines as controls. The most
controlled approach is to use conditional CRE- or FLP-mediated induction/rescue of genetic
abnormality during differentiation84. This approach has successfully been used for studying
autism spectrum disorder-, schizophrenia- and Alzheimer’s disease-associated genetic
abnormalities85–87; however, it has not been used for studying large genetic abnormalities. In our
previous study43, we used a pair of guide RNAs to excise a complete copy of SHANK3 (~69.5 kB) in
human PS cells (Box 1).

Nature Protocols | Volume 21 | February 2026 | 718–748 725
